-------------- LDA Top-4 Results --------------
Query: myth
Corpus: ../../data/symbolism-of-evil.xml
Number of Segs: 1189
Number of Topics: 10
Max DF: 1.0
Min DF: 0.0
Topic Pressence Threshold: 0.3

-------------- LDA Topics --------------
0.075694 Topic #0: evil 95.082, human 37.393, symbolism 34.296, figure 26.367, myth 25.741, make 23.21, expiation 21.256, serpent 17.692, tragic 16.437, doe 16.002,
0.195963 Topic #1: tragic 103.463, myth 90.98, creation 90.705, drama 79.395, type 70.688, evil 59.953, shall 59.136, figure 58.408, order 54.875, history 47.785,
0.185029 Topic #2: defilement 114.878, guilt 89.842, shall 55.953, consciousness 52.727, word 46.464, fault 41.904, sense 40.064, conscience 37.614, prophet 35.355, greek 33.636,
0.317914 Topic #3: myth 573.428, symbol 297.453, soul 208.996, evil 171.905, body 157.907, meaning 123.605, experience 106.813, philosophy 86.218, fall 77.767, adamic 74.48,
0.112700 Topic #4: evil 30.66, king 29.88, make 29.365, history 28.702, creation 26.922, theme 23.855, longer 21.398, freedom 21.394, fall 21.252, story 19.931,
0.063078 Topic #5: israel 25.353, people 22.966, exile 21.946, place 18.8, ethic 15.821, historical 15.244, world 13.304, time 13.169, prophet 11.963, history 11.194,
0.143818 Topic #6: evil 96.512, suffering 79.216, tragic 63.077, god 42.797, ethical 40.965, world 37.545, defilement 32.587, theology 32.535, doe 32.114, just 31.513,
0.052145 Topic #7: desire 23.58, adam 21.554, pardon 17.835, world 13.965, like 11.632, sin 11.614, god 11.451, king 11.25, life 11.238, enlil 11.1,
0.084945 Topic #8: defilement 36.927, evil 34.429, symbol 30.481, punishment 29.895, consciousness 25.088, point 22.386, guilt 20.326, doe 20.258, demand 20.002, dionysos 19.287,
0.093356 Topic #9: experience 37.105, conscience 32.089, history 27.515, memory 20.646, culture 20.511, scrupulous 20.467, past 18.033, people 17.717, consciousness 17.371, knowledge 16.501,
Relevant Topics: [1, 3]

-------------- Segments by Topic --------------
Number of Relevant Segs: 225

Topic: 1
Seg: But what is it that is thus explored, discovered, revealed? We shall not pretend to give in this book a total theory of myths; our contribution to the problem will be strictly limited to the myths that speak of the beginning and the end of evil. We hope that this limitation of our investigation will be repaid by a more rigorous understanding of the function of myths in relation to what we have just called, in terms intentionally vague, the bond between man and what he considers sacred. Evil—defilement or sin—is the sensitive point and, as it were, the "crisis” of this bond which myth makes explicit in its own way. By limiting ourselves to myths concerning the origin and the end, we have a chance of attaining an AssociationValue: 0.6432542789170024


Seg: rape of Bathsheba and the murder of Uriah—in order to reactivate, one after the other, all the associations between the universality and the alienation of sin on the one hand and the symbolism of unclean contact on the other, as well as the sexual echoes of the theme of defilement. Finally, the myth of a first sin, committed by a first man and transmitted to his descendants conceived “in his image,” will place its seal upon all these associations in an “explanation” in terms of origin, the structure of which we shall study further on. But this reactivation of the ancient associations connected with the theme of defilement is only the counterpart of the taking up of the symbolism of defilement into the symbolism of sin. AssociationValue: 0.7455894845660642


Seg: How shall we explain this evolution, which looks like an. inversion of meaning? Perhaps we should say that the tragic myth itself furnishes the schema of irresponsibility, the principle of exculpation ; if the hero is blinded by the god, then he is not guilty of his faults. One sees the contradiction and the hesitation about the meaning of apapria in the tragedy of Oedipus at Colonus, which we have already cited. Those facts of which he bears the weight in spite of himself (anwv) continue to be called “faults” (tw trpiv $ip.aprr}p.ivw, 439). Oedipus can even say: “In me personally you would not find a fault [d/taprfas] to reproach me with for having thus committed these crimes against myself and against my kin” (rdS £ts epavrov rou? cpov? O^pdpravov, 967-68). It is precisely Oedipus who is the symbol of monstrous crime and excusable fault, of divine infatuation (d-nj) and human misfortune (crvp<f>opd)} as the chorus-leader says later (1014). AssociationValue: 0.9861514926251517


Seg: 25	Perhaps it should be said that physical death itself is the “fruit” of gin—not, of course, merely as a biological event, but in the human character of dying, as an event in communal existence, and as the anguish of solitude. We shall come back to this in connection with the Adamic myth. AssociationValue: 0.5200400962401844


Seg: The distinction between rationality and its imitation is, in fact, as decisive as that between history and myth. Indeed, it is the foundation of the latter; for history is history only because its search for “causes” leans upon the Ephteme of the geometers and the physicists, even when it is distinguished from it. If, then, the myth is to survive this double distinction of history and myth as well as of explanation and myth, the myth must not be either history, happening in a definite time and place, or explanation. . AssociationValue: 0.9727225600368063


Seg: We shall have recourse here to the interpretation of the mythical consciousness proposed by the phenomenology of religion (Van der Leeuw, Leenhardt, Eliade). At first glance, that interpretation seems to dissolve the myth-narration in an undivided consciousness that consists less in telling stories, making myths, than in relating itself affectively and practically to the whole of things. What is essential for us here is to understand why that consciousness, structured lower than any narration, any fable or legend, nevertheless breaks out into language under the form of narration. If the phenomenologists of religion have been more concerned to go back from the narration to the pre-narrative root of the myth, we shall follow the opposite course from the pre-narrative conscious ness to the mythical narration. It is in this transition that the whole enigma of the symbolic function of myths is centered. AssociationValue: 0.37721196609509217


Seg: This distance between experience and intention has been recognized by all the authors who have attributed to the myth a biological role of protection against anxiety. If myth-making is an antidote to distress, that is because the man of myths is already an unhappy consciousness; <52><53> for him, unity, conciliation, and recon- AssociationValue: 0.42466581745161736


Seg: But why does the myth, when it is broken up, take the form of narration? What we have to understand now is why the original model, in which the myth and the rite lead us to participate, itself affects the character of a drama. It is, in fact, because that which is ultimately signified by every myth is itself in the form of a drama that the narrations in which the mythical consciousness is fragmented are themselves woven of happenings and personages; because its paradigm is dramatic, the myth itself is a tissue of events and is found nowhere except in the plastic form of narration. But why does the narration-myth refer symbolically to a drama? AssociationValue: 0.39077358580639576


Seg: 3.	Between the myth of chaos, belonging to the creation-drama, and the myth of the fall, we shall insert an intermediate type that may be called “tragic,” because it attains its full manifestation all at once in Greek tragedy. Behind the tragic vision of man we shall look for an implicit, and perhaps unavowable, theology: the tragic theology of the god who tempts, blinds, leads astray. Here the fault appears to be indistinguishable from the very existence of the tragic hero; he does not commit the fault, he is guilty. What, then, can salvation be? Not the “remission of sins,” for there is no pardon for an inevitable fault. Nevertheless, there is a tragic salvation, which consists in a sort of aesthetic deliverance issuing from the tragic spectacle itself, internalized in the depths of existence and converted into pity with respect to oneself. Salvation of this sort makes freedom coincide with understood necessity. AssociationValue: 0.9871409035064515


Seg: the first "type” of myth concerning the origin and the end of evil is illustrated in a striking manner by the Sumero-Akkadian theogonic myths, which have come down to us in a version dating, perhaps, from the beginning of the second millennium before our era. These myths recount the final victory of order over chaos. The Homeric and particularly the Hesiodic theogonies belong to the same type, but less strikingly so; and besides they did not determine the whole vision of the world as completely as the Babylonian epic did. AssociationValue: 0.7993217861159577


Seg: To illustrate this "type” and to discover the motivation that determined it, we will present without preliminaries the great drama of creation called Enuma eltsh (after the first two words of the poem, “When on high. . . .”). The first noteworthy trait exhibited by this creation-myth is that, before recounting the AssociationValue: 0.9608619110847455


Seg: genesis of the world, it recounts the genesis of the divine; the birth of the present world order and the appearance of man, such as he exists now, are the last act of a drama that concerns the generation of the gods. This coming-to-be of the divine has a considerable significance on the level of “types”; <54><55> this myth, which AssociationValue: 0.4352859923752494


Seg: appears most naive in its execution, most indebted to the models provided by fictile production and sexual production, and so most dependent on the narrative form, anticipates typo logically the most subtle ontogeneses of modern philosophy, especially those of German idealism. That is why we must not allow ourselves to be turned away from the typological interpretation by the most legitimate sociological explanations, even if it is true that Babylonia emphasized its political supremacy by making Marduk, hitherto a minor divinity, the hero of the cosmic struggle. That explanation does not exhaust the meaning of the poem; there remains the task of understanding the epic schema itself, through which the political supremacy was expressed, and the vision of the world that was worked out by means of that schema. In short, it is the “epic” mode of ontogenesis that requires interpretation—a mode of thought according to which order comes at the end and not at the beginning. That cosmology completes theogony, that what there is to say about the world is the result of the genesis of the divine —this is the intention that must be recaptured and understood “in” and “beyond” the images of the myth. AssociationValue: 0.3031531034830879


Seg: This first trait leads to a second: if the divine came into being, then chaos is anterior to order and the principle of evil is primordial, coextensive with the generation of the divine. Order came to pass in the divine itself, and it came to pass by the victory of the latest over the earliest forces of divinity. The anterior disorder is represented in our poem by various figures and episodes, and first of all by Tiamat, the primordial mother—“mother of them all” (I, 4)—who with Apsu, the primordial father, represents the initial commingling of the vastness of the marine waters with the fresh waters. But this liquid chaos has a surcharge of meaning, in which the myth of the origin of evil takes shape. For Tiamat is more than the visible immensity of the waters; she has the power to produce. Moreover, she is capable of plotting against the other gods. According to the story, the younger gods disturbed the primeval peace of the old couple: AssociationValue: 0.6167158523928422


Seg: If our interpretation of the “type” that presides over the Babylonian myth of creation is exact, the counterproof should be furnished by an examination of the so-called myths of the fall in Sumerian and Akkadian mythology. The “type” of primordial violence excludes, in fact, the “type” of the fall—that is to say, in the precise meaning of the term, a degradation in order which is distinct from the institution of order and which, in mythical terms, is “posterior” to creation. AssociationValue: 0.9749961811911793


Seg: Now, it was believed at first that one could recognize in Babylonian literature the first expression of that which was to become the Biblical narrative of Paradise and the fall. <59> The old Sumerian myth, retranslated, reinterpreted, broken up into several fragments, and now attached to the “cycle of Enki and Ninhursag,” does, in fact, depict a land of bliss, “pure,” “clean,” and “bright,” in which there are apparently no death, no sickness, no life-and-death struggles among the animals. The water-god begets a series of divinities born of his spouse, “the mother of the land,” then of his daughter, then of his granddaughter, until his spouse, taking his seed at the moment when he is embracing his great-granddaughter, causes eight plants to sprout from it. But before the goddess has named them, Enki plucks and eats them. The goddess curses him in these words: “Until he is dead I shall not look upon him with the ‘eye of life’ " (vs. 219). This curse makes the god weak and ill. Finally the fox reconciles the two, and the goddess cures the eight ills of Enki by creating an appropriate deity for each sick organ. If it is true that the images of the Biblical Paradise are already formed in this poem, which has wrongly received the title of “A Paradise AssociationValue: 0.9901083813292622


Seg: As to the Flood, Babylonian as well as Sumerian, it cannot be said that the narrations which have come down to us put the accent on a fault committed by men, for which the cosmic catastrophe is the punishment. Indeed, it is here that we see most clearly how like images can belong to different types. Where the Biblical myth appears to be closest to a Babylonian source— whether that source be one of the accounts with which we are acquainted or a still more primitive tradition, <62>—the images that it seems to derive from its Babylonian source receive a distinctive mark from the general intention of the type of the fall; the flood is the close of a long series of stories (Abel and Gain, the tower of Babel, etc,) designed to illustrate the growing wickedness of men. There is nothing of the sort in our Babylonian sources: the same stock of images lends support to a radically different vision of AssociationValue: 0.5245591952182831


Seg: It seems to me, then, that the absence of a genuine myth of the fall in the Sumero-Babylonian culture is the counterpart of the vision of the world set forth in their myths of creation. Where evil is primordial and primordially involved in the very coming-to-be of the gods, the problem that might be resolved by a myth of the AssociationValue: 0.44188190092387564


Seg: fall is already resolved. That is why there is no place for a myth of the fall alongside a creation-myth of this sort; the problem of evil is resolved from the beginning and even, as we have seen, before the beginning: before the creation of man, before the creation of the world, even before the birth of the god who establishes order. AssociationValue: 0.40830307719737063


Seg: Consequently, every historical drama, every historical conflict, must be attached by a bond of re-enactment of the cultual-ritual type to the drama of creation. Let us try to understand this reenactment of the foundation of the world and its implications step by step in all the spheres of human existence, from worship to politics. It is there, in fact, that we shall find the type of man corresponding to this vision of theogonic strife and that we shall discover the equivalent of what soteriology is for other types of myth. AssociationValue: 0.9769199112659072


Seg: The first entrance of the drama of creation into the History of men is the cult and the ensemble of ritual practices that surround all human activities. <65> Now the cult is already a kind of action— not only a Active re-enactment, but a renewal of the drama by active participation. Mankind, says the creation-myth, <66> was created for the service of the gods, for which the gods founded Babylon, its temple, and its cult; and this service, when it is addressed to the god who established order, evoking this attribute explicitly, calls for the real re-enactment of the drama of creation. The magnitude of the New Year’s festival at Babylon is well known. <67> A whole people, in the presence of the gods assembled in effigy, reenacts the original battle in which the world order was won and relives the fundamental emotions of the poem—the cosmic anguish, the exaltation of battle, the jubilation in triumph. By the celebration of the festival, the people place their whole existence under the sign of the drama of creation. The connection with the poem is recalled by the recitation of it on the fourth day. The mimed dramatization of the poem in the rite of the festival is further amplified by the identification of Marduk with Tammuz, the dying and reviving god. Like the popular god, the national god is lost, held prisoner in the “mountain”; the people, thrown into confusion, weep for him as for a suffering and dying god; it is at once the death of a god and the return of the creation to chaos. The people “descend” to the imprisoned god; then the god revives with the aid of the ritual; Marduk is liberated and released; his enthronement is re-enacted and the people participate in his deliverance by the great procession that marks the approach of the culminating point of the festival. The procession symbolizes Marduk’s AssociationValue: 0.45166376734470315


Seg: Gan the verification of the myth by the mode of life be pushed further? The structure of the myth permits us to anticipate what may be called a theology of the Holy War. If the King represents the god who overcomes chaos, the Enemy should represent the forces of evil in our history and his insolence should represent a resurgence of the ancient chaos. AssociationValue: 0.55356123843505


Seg: So I see the ultimate outcome of this type of myth in a theology of war founded on the identification of the Enemy with the powers that the god has vanquished and continues to vanquish in the drama of creation. Through the mediation of the king, the drama of creation becomes significant for the whole history of mankind, and particularly for all of that aspect of human life which is characterized by combat. In other words, the mythological type of the drama of creation is marked by the King-Enemy relation, AssociationValue: 0.9756726748844902


Seg: which becomes the political relation par excellence. This phenomenological filiation is fundamental, for it introduces us through the myth to the problem of political evil, which will hold an important place in our later research. Even if, as it seems, this theology of war was not developed explicitly and systematically by the Assyro-Babylonians, it can be said inversely that any coherent theology of the holy war is founded on the first mythological “type” of Evil, According to that theology, the Enemy is a Wicked One, war is his punishment, and there are wicked ones because first there is evil and then order. In the final analysis, evil is not an accident that upsets a previous order; it belongs constitutionally to the foundation of order. Indeed, it is doubly original: first, in the role of the Enemy, whom the forces of chaos have never ceased to incarnate, although they were crushed at the beginning of the world; second, in the figure of the King, sent to “destroy the wicked and the evil” by the same ambiguous power of devastation and of prudence that once upon a time established order,  <74> AssociationValue: 0.42562474392854227


Seg: We have supported our analysis of the first type of myth by the example of the Babylonian creation-drama. In that myth not only is the “type” dominant, but it succeeded in animating the whole of a culture, since it furnished it with an understanding of its political existence, AssociationValue: 0.6756240171998676


Seg: Such, in our opinion, is the discontinuity at the level of “types” of myth; this new “type” organizes itself around new “significations” concerning creation, evil, history, salvation. But as a “type” does not become explicit all at once, it is perfectly understandable that it should at first avail itself of the “images” deposited by the  <75> AssociationValue: 0.9590859814073519


Seg: We can, therefore, relate to this subterranean work of the new myth certain of the developments described above as the damped waves of the old myth. We shall review them in the reverse order. AssociationValue: 0.9399899875819675


Seg: The ideology of the king may, indeed, continue to nourish the theme of the kingship of man, or that of man as the son of God, image of God, little lower than a God; but the wickedness of man, however kingly, discovered in the course of several centuries of prophetic accusation, remains without roots in the creation, now that the creation is without drama. A new myth, purely anthropological, will be needed to take the place of the old cosmic myth. The figure of the Urmensch will then have to be detached from the figure of the King; his fault will have to constitute a radical novelty in the good creation. It is this need which will be fulfilled by the Adamic myth. AssociationValue: 0.536989224838634


Seg: Greek theogony, Homeric and Hesiodic, belongs essentially to the creation-drama “type,” so magnificently illustrated by the Babylonian poem. That is why we shall not spend much time on it here, and why we shall seek in it not so much new testimony concerning this “type” of myth of origin, but rather the signs of a phenomenological transition towards other mythical “types.” The theme of the Titan, which can turn in the direction of the tragic myth, or of the Orphic myth, or even of the Biblical myth of the fall, will interest us just because of its indeterminateness. AssociationValue: 0.6506852174870806


Seg: It was Hesiod who brought into the foreground the bloody theme which concerns us here, In that peasant fresco concerning origins, the union of Ouranos and Gaia—Sky and Earth—takes the place of the marine couple. Let us leave aside Hesiod’s effort to carry the origin back beyond what he nevertheless calls the beginning (apX0> namely, “those to whom Earth and the vast Sky had given birth” (Theogony, 45). The anteriority of the Abyss (xaos) and its offspring—Erebos, Night, Aither, Light of Day, etc,—anticipate a stage that goes beyond the theogonic myth in the direction of powers and principles that break away from the story-form and consequently from the myth itself. But the same myth that points in the direction of physics and dialectics immerses itself in the horror of primordial Grimes. The “terrible” sons, born of Earth and Sky —Sky “hated them from the beginning”; he denies them access to the light and conceals them in the caves of the earth; “and while Sky took pleasure in that evil (Ka«$) deed, the enormous Earth choked and groaned in her depths” (158-59). Into the hands of her sons she puts the sickle of vengeance: “Children, my offspring and a raving father’s, if you will follow my advice, we shall punish the criminal offense (kclktiv .,. Aw/J^r) of a father, though he be your father, since he first conceived foul deeds” (163-65). The abject episode of the mutilation of Ouranos by the hand of Kronos “of the crafty thoughts” is well known. Similar monstrous episodes occur again in the reign of Kronos, who devours his children. The victory of Zeus himself, like that of Marduk, is the fruit of trickery and violence. Thus order borrows from primordial violence the impulsion by which it gains the victory. And the earlier disorder survives its defeat in a thousand figures of distress and terror: “odious Death,” the Parcae, the Keres, “implacable avengers who pursue all faults against the gods or men, goddesses whose dreadful anger never ceases before they have inflicted on the guilty, whoever he may be, a cruel blow,”—and Nemesis, “scourge of mortal men,” .—and “violent-hearted Strife.” “And odious Strife bore grievous Pain—Forgetfulness, Hunger, tearful Woes—Conflicts, Combats, AssociationValue: 0.41305573413747554


Seg: It is here that the figures of the Titans present themselves to us. They are very, interesting for a typological investigation. On the one hand, they are rooted in the cosmogonic myth; they are representatives of the old, vanquished gods: “But their father, the vast Sky, calling them to account, gave to the sons he had engendered the name of Titans; by stretching (.riTaivovT as) their hands too high, they had, he said, committed in their folly a horrible offense and the future would take vengeance (riW) for it” (207, 210). In this sense the theogonic stories just cited were also stories of Titans, of archaic and savage forces which obeyed no law. But the image of the Titans moves in the direction of other mythical “types” as soon as it is associated with the origin of man: the Titans are no longer witnesses only of the ancient era, of primordial disorder, but of a subversion posterior to the establishment of order. It is to be noted th' in Hesiod the episode of “crafty-minded” Kronos begins with .lie disputes between the gods and men about the distribution of sacrificed victims (535 ff,). And it is because Zeus has withdrawn from human beings the fire of the lightning that Prometheus steals, in the holloW of a fennel stalk, “the bright gleam of the untiring fire.” Thus 'Hesiod’s stories concerning the struggle of the Titans against the Olympians have this ambiguous character of continuing the creation-drama and of presaging what one might call the post-divine drama—in a word, anthropogony, whether it be of the tragic type, the Orphic type, or the Adamic type. AssociationValue: 0.9917417590714604


Seg: Nevertheless, the Promethean myth, at least in Hesiod, is not completely emancipated from its theogonic matrix; it continues to share in the defeat of the Titanic and chthonian elements belonging to the origin of things and to the genesis of the divine itself. Prometheus does not invent evil; he continues it; his guile is a sequel to the guile displayed in the theogonic combats. AssociationValue: 0.316215623158316


Seg: Thus the myth of the insolent race of the Titans is incorporated by turns in the tragic type, the Orphic type, and the Biblical type. It is a sort of evasive myth that hesitates between several types of anthropogony, while remaining a captive of its primitive theogonic matrix. It represents an uncertain attempt to situate the origin of evil in a region of being intermediate between the divine and the human. That is why it remains unusual, close both to chaos and to the Urmensch. It signifies, perhaps, an attempt to tie the antiquity of human evil, which is always already there, to those aspects of brute reality which testify of themselves to a resistance to order and beauty—masses of shapeless rocks, the Caucasus battered by storms, to which Aeschylus’ Prometheus is nailed. AssociationValue: 0.9849974615392869


Seg: We shall call pre-tragic those themes which are anterior to the drama and the spectacle. The first and principal pre-tragic theme is not specifically Greek; it appears in all cultures, every time that the initiative in fault is traced back into the divine and that this divine initiative works through the weakness of man and appears as divine possession. Under this quite undifferentiated form, it is indistinguishable from the preceding theme, since in both of them the principle of evil is as primordial as the principle of good; and so in the figure of the Babylonian god Enlil, whose ambiguous might was the source both of devastation and of good counsel, we could see the beginning of the first and of the second type. But a typological differentiation occurs in the direction of a myth of chaos, enveloped in a drama of creation, when the principle of evil is polarly opposed to the divine as its original Enemy; while the ambiguous figure tends toward the tragic when such a polarization does not occur and when the same divine power appears both as AssociationValue: 0.6599547203934194


Seg: There remains the tragic spectacle itself, to purify whoever yields himself to the sublimity of the poetic word. It is neither counsel in the Apollonian sense, nor an alteration of personality in the Dionysiac sense, except, perhaps, in a very remote sense—for example, in the sense that the spectacle fosters “illusion.” Through the spectacle the ordinary man enters into the “chorus” which weeps and sings with the hero; the place of tragic reconciliation is the “chorus” and its lyricism. By entering into the tragic “chorus” ourselves, we pass from the Dionysiac illusion to the specific ecstasy of tragic wisdom. Then the myth is among us; it is we who are frightened and lament, because we have put ourselves into the scene. One must become a member of the chorus in order to yield himself to the feelings which are specifically those of the tragic reconciliation. The ordinary man knows only fear and the sort of bashful sympathy that the spectacle of misfortune calls forth; in becoming a member of the chorus, he enters a sphere of feelings that may be called symbolic and mythic, in consideration of the type of utterance to which they are proportionate. These feelings, as we have known since Aristotle, are, first, tragic <£o/?os, the specific sort of fear which comes over us when we are suddenly faced with the conjunction of freedom and empirical ruin; and then tragic eAeos, that merciful gaze which no longer accuses or condemns but shows pity. Terror and Pity are both modalities of suffering, but of a suffering that may be called suffering in the face of destiny, since it needs the retardation and the acceleration of a hostile fate and the agency of a heroic freedom. That is why those feelings come to birth only in the aura of a tragic myth. But they are also a modality of understanding: the hero becomes a seer; when he loses his sight, Oedipus attains to the vision of Tiresias. But he does not know that which he understands in any objective and systematic way. Hesiod said long ago: iraOuv Si t« v/paos Zyvbi—suffering makes wise the simple (Works, 218). AssociationValue: 0.8979172608356324


Seg: Such is the deliverance which is not outside the tragic, but within it: an aesthetic transposition of fear and pity by virtue of a tragic myth turned into poetry and by the grace of an ecstasy born of a spectacle. AssociationValue: 0.9470511253130436


Seg: Second characteristic: the etiological myth of Adam is the most extreme attempt to separate the origin of evil from the origin of the good; its intention is to set up a radical origin of evil distinct from the more primordial origin of the goodness of things. Whatever the strictly philosophical difficulties of this attempt may be, the distinction between radical and primordial is essential to the anthropological character of the Adamic myth; it is that which makes man a beginning of evil in the bosom of a creation which has already had its absolute beginning in the creative act of God. At the time when the Adamic myth was composed, the concept of freedom had not yet been elaborated as a support for this, so to speak, second beginning, although , the Deuteronomic idea of a radical ■choice imposed by the prophetic summons portends the evolution of the Adamic myth toward a speculation of g higher degree, in which freedom will be not only a sort of beginning, but the power of the creature to defect—that is to say, in the strict sense, the power of the human creature to undo (difaire), and to unmake AssociationValue: 0.3764107471053707


Seg: the root of his actions. I do not venture to say “for his being”— first, because he never formed that ontological concept, and, second, because the purpose of the myth of the fall is to dissociate the historical starting point of evil from the starting point, which we moderns can call ontological, of creation. At least his repentance penetrates to the “heart” of man, to his purpose—that is to say, to the monadic source of his many actions. Furthermore, at the same time as his piety discovers the personal dimension of sin, it also discovers its communal dimension; the evil “heart” of each is also the evil “heart” of all; a specific we, namely, “we sinners,” unifies all mankind in an undivided guilt. Thus the spirit of repentance discovered something beyond our acts, an evil root that is both individual and collective, such as a choice that each would make for all and all for each. AssociationValue: 0.3605338881973591


Seg: Thus we find again what we have called the universalizing function of myth. But at the same time we find the other two functions, likewise evoked by the experience of repentance. We know that the theology of history, around which the fundamental representations of guilt and salvation in the Old Testament revolve, alternates between extreme threats and extreme promises: “Woe unto them that desire the Day of Yahweh! What do you look for from the Day of Yahweh? It will be darkness and not light” (Amos 5:18). And then: “Behold, the days come, saith Yahweh, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah. ... I will put my law in their inward parts, and -write it in their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people” (Jer. 31:31-34). This dialectic of judgment and mercy is read into contemporary history, into the actual history of the Exile and the Return, by the Jewish Prophet; and in interpreting history he makes it significant at the same time that he really bends it to his purposes. The same dialectic of judgment and mercy, beginning from an interpretation of the actual history of the prophetic AssociationValue: 0.6949199952375029


Seg: epoch, is projected into a mythical representation of the “beginning” and the “end.” Already the exodus from Egypt, reinterpreted in the light of the prophetic experience, had furnished, as we have seen, the fundamental symbolism of captivity and deliverance; in its turn the calling of Abraham, torn from the country of his birth and set upon the paths of his vocation, is understood on the model of the Prophet’s obedience to an irresistible inner call; and finally, the prologue to history in the garden of Eden contains in epitome all that the dramatic destiny of Israel had revealed about the meaning of human existence: call, disobedience, exile; Adam and Eve are driven from Paradise as Israel is banished from Canaan. But, just as “a remnant will return,” so the myth of the flood, intentionally welded to the myth of Paradise lost, symbolically shows the new creation emerging from the disaster of the waters and made pure by the judgment which both condemns and pardons. Noah is still Adam, is still Man, by turns exiled and saved from the waters—that is to say, recreated. AssociationValue: 0.5970647231380908


Seg: The proto-historical myth thus served not only to generalize the experience of Israel, applying it to all mankind, at all times and in all places, but also to extend to all mankind the great tension between condemnation and mercy that the teaching of the Prophets had revealed in the particular destiny of Israel, <83> . Finally, there is the last function of the myth as it was motivated in the faith of Israel: the myth prepares the way for speculation by exploring the point of rupture between the ontological and the historical. The confession of sins drew nearer to this point of rupture as it gained in depth, and it discovered it by means of a paradox. It is the holiness of God that reveals the abyss of sin in man; but, on the other hand, if the root of sin is in the “nature,” in the “being” of man, then the sin revealed by the holiness of AssociationValue: 0.31434132743486565


Seg: “One” man; the chronicler called the “Yahwist” in Biblical criticism found the idea for him in a myth which was no doubt very primitive and which may even have had a very different meaning —the myth of a first man or, rather, of a first pair driven out of a wonderful garden because they had disobeyed a taboo. The myth is very old, but its significance is new; and that significance comes to it from a retrograde motion in the understanding of history that starts from contemporary history as a nucleus. It would seem that the myth ’was seized upon in the course of meditation on the origins of the chosen people and annexed to that meditation through the intermediary of a folklore in which the different ethnic groups are represented by a single family, by a single ancestor. The time of the patriarchs, before Abraham, points in its turn to a still older time, in which all the eponymous ancestors of all the peoples spring from a single pair who would be to the whole of mankind what each patriarch is to the whole of his people—namely, the founding ancestor of a great family now broken up into many peoples with many languages. That, chronicle of the first man furnishes the symbol of the concrete universal, the model of man exiled from the kingdom, the paradigm of the beginning of evil. In Adam we are one and all; the mythical figure of the first man provides a focal point at the beginning of history for man’s unity-in-multiplicity. AssociationValue: 0.739070553854914


Seg: Nevertheless, this myth is not negligible; for, if we may believe M, Humbert, whose interpretation I adopt here, it entailed a view of man that was suppressed by the Yahwist editor, but not so completely that we cannot discover some traces of it in certain manifest “doublets” of Chapter 3. It seems that the story of creation  <84><85> AssociationValue: 0.46569390126102883


Seg: Thus the whole condition of man appears to be subjected to the rule of hardship; it is the hardship of being a man which, in the striking brevity of the myth, makes manifest his fallen state. Thus an anthropology of ambiguity issues from the myth; henceforth the greatness and the guilt of man are inextricably mingled, so that it is impossible to say: here is the primordial man, there is the evil result of his contingent history. AssociationValue: 0.9689586853630475


Seg: Such is the dialectic of sin and the law, which Luther and Nietzsche also knew well. How, then, can an interdiction belong to the order of innocence? No doubt we must understand that, in making man free, God gives him a finite freedom. The finiteness of that freedom consists in the fact that it is a freedom primordially oriented not, of course, by what we call “values,” which are already much elaborated cultural products, but by a hierarchical principle of preference among values. This ethical structure of freedom constitutes the authority of values in general. Perhaps that is why the Yahwist, who elsewhere relates the crime of Cain and who therefore knows the gravity of murder, retained the naive motif of the forbidden fruit, which may have had a different meaning in the, older legend. In the new and peculiarly Hebraic myth, the forbidden fruit stands for prohibition in general; compared to murder, eating forbidden fruit is a peccadillo. <86> Hence the mon- AssociationValue: 0.6105902512004752


Seg: Perhaps it is necessary to have assimilated this succession of figures in order to understand the one which insures the ultimate symmetry between the Adamic figure of the myth of origin and the series of eschatological figures—namely, the figure of the “second Adam,” dear to St. Paul. If Son of Man means Man and if Adam also means Man, the question is fundamentally of the same thing (although St. Paul never uses the expression Son of Man, but speaks only of the "second Adam,” the “last Adam,” the “Adam who is to come”). This new figure at the same time consecrates the preceding ones and adds a decisive trait to them. On the one hand, it supposes the fusion of the two figures of the Son of Man and the suffering servant, as well as the relation between a single figure of Man and the whole of mankind, between “one” and “many.” On the other hand, the new meaning that St. Paul gives to the comparison of the two Adams is decisive for a retrospective understanding of the whole series of the earlier eschatological figures. What particularly interests us here is that, in AssociationValue: 0.6321774317674499


Seg: None of the other myths is a myth of the "soul”; even when they speak of a rupture in the condition of the human being, they never divide man into two realities. The drama of creation does not concern man as soul; it presents him as an undivided reality; it makes him as a whole the seat of the drama and an author of the drama, even if only by means of the ritual re-enactment. The tragic vision of the world is just as little a myth of the psyche; it takes man as an undivided whole just as much as the creation-drama does; it is the hero as a whole and, so to speak, without remainder, who is stricken and condemned. It is true that the esthetic contemplation of misfortune, which is the specific “consolation” in tragedy, can be considered as a detachment of the soul, akin to one of those “madnesses,” ecstatic or phrenetic, that Plato enumerates in the Phaedrus (244a) and that reveal the supernatural, divine origin of the soul; but tragic enthusiasm, as such, is not a departure toward another region, but ecstasy in the spectacle itself and in meditation upon finitude and misfortune. That is why the enthusiasm of the tragic spectacle never gave birth AssociationValue: 0.3617551627953698


Seg: If now we turn to the literary documents, we find the following situation: the Platonic philosophy presupposes a 7raAatos Aoyos —an “ancient discourse”—distinct from the Homeric and Hesiodic theogonies and traditionally called Orphic, which it transposes, integrates with its reflection on the soul, and rationalizes. Thus it makes the myth its origin, one of the non-philosophical origins of philosophy. Moreover, as we shall insist at the end of this chapter, there is a pact between this myth and philosophy which has no equivalent in any other myth. Philosophy breaks with the theogonic myth, it breaks with the tragic myth and its un avow able theology; but, after the sophistic crisis, it recharges itself in the Orphic myth and draws therefrom a new substance and a new depth. Plato himself shattered the tragic myth and transposed the TraAaios Ao'yos from Orphism; it is in this sense that “philosophy” presupposes Orphism. Unfortunately that iraXaw? Ao'yo? is not to be AssociationValue: 0.4863609390551959


Seg: We do, indeed, possess an etiological myth that is called “Or-::-phic”; but that myth is attested, in its complete form, only by the; Neo-Platonists, by Damascius and Proclus, This is an astonishing; situation: the perfect Orphic myth is post-philosophical. The myth is well known: the infant Dionysos was assassinated by the cunning and cruel Titans, who thereupon boiled and devoured the members; of the god; Zeus, to punish them, blasted them with lightning and -from their ashes created the present race of men. That is why men ted ay participate both in the evil nature of the Titans and in the divine nature of Dionysos, whom the Titans had assimilated in the course of their horrible feast. It is a very fine myth, a true myth of original sin. The mixture that constitutes the present condition of human beings stems from an anterior, pre-human, superhuman crime, and so evil is inherited; it points back to an event that inaugurates the confusion of two natures which had before been separate. That event is a murder which signifies both the death of a god and participation in the divine. Yes, it is a very fine myth. Unfortunately 'we have no means of proving that it belonged, in this final form, to the “ancient discourse” of Orphism; indeed, we have reasons for suspecting that it is a Neo-Platonic invention, created for the pleasure and the profit of a philosophizing exegesis of myths. AssociationValue: 0.4736497196522981


Seg: Caught between a myth that is pre-philosophical, but not to be found, and a myth that is perfect, but post-philosophical, the phenomenologist is indeed embarrassed. The situation would be desperate if it were not possible to distinguish from the fully worked out etiological myth, which is perhaps contemporaneous with the philosophical exegesis of it, a myth of situation—a myth of the present situation of man—which reveals “soul” and “body” as distinct magnitudes and powers, although it remains silent concerning the origin of their confusion. This myth of a primordial distinction is not undiscoverable; it can be reconstructed on the sole basis of the documents of the archaic and classical epoch; it is, by itself, the “ancient discourse” presupposed by philosophy. With respect to AssociationValue: 0.4308189761001001


Seg: well as among the Jews. Hence, it is to an intentional analysis of the myth of the fault of the Titans that we must now proceed, in order to show in what sense it explicates and completes the myth of situation. Such an intentional analysis presupposes that we take the myth in its final state (hence, in its late manifestation), and that we relate it retrospectively to the exegesis of the human condition that we have already reconstructed, without the aid of that myth, on the sole basis of the testimony of classic authors. AssociationValue: 0.3115892758848967


Seg: What do we find in that final myth? A theogony which, in itself, belongs to the type studied above under the heading of the drama of creation, but which veers in the direction of an anthropogony in agreement with the experience of the deep-seated discordance in man. AssociationValue: 0.9499933092711484


Seg: The drama of creation in which the new anthropogonic episode is set is not an indifferent frame; it imposes its presence and its general meaning on the new myth in a twofold manner. In the first place, it gives a cosmic dimension, an ontological depth to the misfortune which afflicts the soul. That misfortune is rooted in the pain of being, represented by the violent succession of the generations of great gods; the theogony gives Grime, Discord, and Guile a prehuman significance by associating them with the origin of things. In this regard, the figure of the Titans, which will be the pivot of the new myth, is a part of that pain of being; the Titan is the figure through which human evil is rooted in prehuman evil, at the same time as the pain of being is turned in the direction of anthropology through the same figure. But, in particular, the drama of creation preached to the Orphics already implies a possible interpretation of evil from which the strictly ‘'Orphic” myth of the fault of the Titans stands out in contrast. The interpretation of evil through the theogony remained obscure in the poem of Hesiod, who hardly did more than to put the disparate primordial figures in a series. Some of those figures—Kronos, Ouranos, Zeus— are divinities from an earlier time who were now joined by means of dynastic succession, procreation, or murder; others—Night, Death, War—are aspects deemed primordial in our experience, joined together by a filiation comparable to the preceding; and others, finally, are regions or elements of nature such as Earth and AssociationValue: 0.44462189254941575


Seg: But the same myth plunges back into naive imagination. In order to identify with this rather esoteric Phanes the Zeus of common belief, the dying Zeus Zagreus and the dismembered and revived Dionysos of the sects of initiates, the myth resorts to a series of subterfuges. It tells of a second creation of the world by Zeus, who swallows Phanes and his creation and thus causes all his power to pass into himself; thus, says the myth, “all was created anew.” Then the myth imagines that Zeus cedes his power to Dionysos: “O gods, lend your ears; this is he whom I have made your king.” These concatenations are very much in accord with the taste of the most archaic theogony. Is Plato alluding to such a series of reigns when he exclaims ironically in the Phitebus; “At the sixth generation, cease the order of your song’5 (66c)? AssociationValue: 0.9863610315520975


Seg: Toward what interpretation of evil is the myth oriented in its theogonic part? At first sight evil appears to be still included in the origin of things, as it was for Hesoid and particularly the Babylonians. But the figure of Phanes points to something different; in Phanes, the one and multiple manifestation, we have no longer a representation of the primordial contradiction between good and AssociationValue: 0.7108993186620537


Seg: It may be remarked that the Biblical myth also distributes the origin of evil between a human figure—Adam—and a non-human figure—the serpent,—thus separating the willed from the suffered. The myth of the Titan, instead of dividing choice and fate between man and demon, concentrates them in a single, ambiguous figure on the border between the divine and the human. The Titan is not truly other than man: we.are bom from his ashes; he is the inherited and contracted part of evil choice, that which Plato calls our Titanic nature; he attests that the lowest degree of freedom is close to the brute, angry, inordinate force of the unleashed elements; Prometheus is in harmony only with the shapeless scenery of the Caucasus, not with the temperate landscape of Colonus, which bathes the aged, transfigured Oedipus in sweetness. This savage possibility in ourselves, beginning from which our freedom becomes humanized, is relegated by the myth to the origin and incarnated in a crime older than any human fault; and so the Titan represents the anteriority of evil in relation to actual human evil. There is no occasion for opposing it to those evils, evoked AssociationValue: 0.3030480750396705


Seg: Let us, then, sketch the movement that leads from the Adamic myth to the tragic myth under its two aspects, anthropological and theological, and from the tragic myth to the most archaic and apparently most outmoded vision of the world, the vision of the-ogony. AssociationValue: 0.4888516502319353


Seg: Thus the tragic myth is reaffirmed as an associated myth, revealing the fateful reverse side of the ethical confession of sins. Under the figure of the blinded and misled hero, it expresses the role of ineluctable guilt. This fateful aspect, joined to the aspects of antecedence and externality expressed by the other myths, points toward the quasi-nature of ah evil already there, at the very heart of the evil that springs up now. It can only be represented dramatically, theatrically, as a “fate,” as a fold or crease that freedom has contracted. That is why tragedy survived its destruction by Platonism and Christianity. What cannot be thought, can and must nevertheless be exhibited in the figure of the tragic hero; and that figure necessarily excites anew the great tragic emotions; for the non-posited aspect that any positing of evil involves can only awaken terror and compassion, beyond all judgment and all condemnation; a merciful vision of man comes to limit the accusation and save him from the wrath of the Judge. AssociationValue: 0.4816827707283977


Seg: If now we turn back from “faith in the hidden God and the “re-enactment” of misfortune—which illuminates it with a sombre light—to the Adamic myth, we see what tragedy contributes to the understanding of that myth. It contributes two things: on the one hand, pity for human beings, who are nevertheless accused by the Prophet; on the other hand, fear and trembling before the divine abyss, before the God whose holiness is nevertheless proclaimed by the Prophet. Perhaps it is necessary that the possibility of the tragic God should never be abolished altogether, so that Biblical theology may be protected from the platitudes of ethical monotheism, with its Legislator and its Judge, confronting a moral subject who is endowed with complete and unfettered freedom, still intact after each act. Because the tragic theology is always possible, although not to be spoken, God is Deus Absconditus. And it is always possible, because suffering can no longer be understood as a chastisement.	t AssociationValue: 0.4616127991082604


Seg: Shall we leave the Adamic myth and the tragic myth face to face, as two interpretations of existence between which we can only fluctuate endlessly? Not at all. AssociationValue: 0.5167054975946547


Seg: Meditation on the invincibility of the tragic myth gives an indication, in its turn, how the myth of chaos, too, can be reaffirmed up to a certain point at least. The question arises: Does the theo-gonic myth still speak to me, or is it radically dead? It must be admitted that this question cannot receive a complete answer at this stage in our meditation. Of course, in a way, the theogonic myth has been blasted by ethical monotheism, the connection of AssociationValue: 0.9742816225562977


Seg: Is this attempt to view all the myths in the perspective of a dominant myth entirely satisfactory? We do not pretend that it is. If it were, that would mean that the hermeneutics of myths can take the place of systematic philosophy, which is not the case. The universe of the myths remains a broken universe; not being able to unify the mythical universe on the basis of one of these myths alone, imaginative and sympathetic understanding, without personal appropriation, often remains as the thinker’s only resource. Besides, alternatives which cannot be settled by a simple passage from the statics to the dynamics of the myths subsist at the flection of each of the pairs that we have constructed in order to get the dynamics going. AssociationValue: 0.3443133113829452


Seg: Is this attempt to view all the myths in the perspective of a dominant myth entirely satisfactory? We do not pretend that it is. If it were, that would mean that the hermeneutics of myths can take the place of systematic philosophy, which is not the case. The universe of the myths remains a broken universe; not being able to unify the mythical universe on the basis of one of these myths alone, imaginative and sympathetic understanding, without personal appropriation, often remains as the thinker’s only resource. Besides, alternatives which cannot be settled by a simple passage from the statics to the dynamics of the myths subsist at the flection of each of the pairs that we have constructed in order to get the dynamics going. AssociationValue: 0.3443133113829452


Topic: 3
Seg: To what does speculation refer us? To living experience? Not yet. Behind speculation, and beneath gnosis and anti-gnostic constructions, we find myths. Myth will here be taken to mean what the history of religions now finds in it: not a false explanation by means of images and fables, but a traditional narration which relates to events that happened at the beginning of time and which has the purpose of providing grounds for the ritual actions of men of today and, in a general manner, establishing all the forms of action and thought by which man understands himself in his world. For us, moderns, a myth is only a myth because we can no longer connect that time with the time of history as we write it, employing the critical method, nor can we connect mythical places with our geographical space. This is why the myth can no longer be an explanation; to exclude its etiological intention is the theme of all necessary demythologization. But in losing its explanatory pretensions the myth reveals its exploratory significance and its contribution to understanding, which we shall later call its symbolic function—that is to say, its power of discovering and revealing the bond between man and what he considers sacred. Paradoxical as it may seem, the myth, when it is thus demythologized through contact with scientific history and elevated to the dignity of a symbol, is a dimension of modern thought. AssociationValue: 0.9910878117466718


Seg: But what is it that is thus explored, discovered, revealed? We shall not pretend to give in this book a total theory of myths; our contribution to the problem will be strictly limited to the myths that speak of the beginning and the end of evil. We hope that this limitation of our investigation will be repaid by a more rigorous understanding of the function of myths in relation to what we have just called, in terms intentionally vague, the bond between man and what he considers sacred. Evil—defilement or sin—is the sensitive point and, as it were, the "crisis” of this bond which myth makes explicit in its own way. By limiting ourselves to myths concerning the origin and the end, we have a chance of attaining an AssociationValue: 0.34074194330128854


Seg: intensive rather than an extensive understanding of myth. It is, in fact, because evil is supremely the crucial experience of the sacred that the threat of the dissolution of the bond between man and the sacred makes us most intensely aware of man’s dependence on the powers of the sacred. Therefore the myth of “crisis” is at the same time the myth of “totality”: in recounting how these things began and how they will end, the myth places the experience of man in a whole that receives orientation and meaning from the narration. Thus, an understanding of human reality as a whole operates through the myth by means of a reminiscence and an expectation.	^ AssociationValue: 0.9795429878386771


Seg: Shall we begin, then, with an interpretation of the myths about the origin and the end of evil? Not yet. The stratum of myths, to which we are referred by pseudo-rational speculation, refers us in its turn back to an experience lying at a lower level than any narration or any gnosis. Thus, the account of the fall in the Bible, even if it comes from traditions older than the preaching of the prophets of Israel, gets its meaning only from an experience of sin which is itself an attainment of Jewish piety. It is the “confession of sins” in the cult and the prophetic appeal for "justice and righteousness” that furnish the myth with a substructure of meaning. AssociationValue: 0.8087485969243938


Seg: But is this re-enactment possible? Does not the mediative role that we have granted to speculation and myth condemn in advance the attempt to restore the pre-mythical and pte-speculative foundation? The venture would be hopeless if, lower than gnosis and myth, there were no longer any language. But this is not the case; there is the language of confession, which in the languages of myth and speculation is raised to the second and third degrees. AssociationValue: 0.6174383102733456


Seg: Moreover, this experience is complex. Instead of the simple experience that one might expect, the confession of sins reveals several layers of experience. “Guilt,” in the precise sense of a feeling of the unworthiness at the core of one’s personal being, is only the advanced point of a radically individualized and interiorized experience. This feeling of guilt points to a more fundamental experience, the experience of “sin,” which includes all men and indicates the real situation of man before God, whether man knows it or not. It is this sin of which the myth of the fall recounts the entry into the world and which speculation on original sin attempts to erect into a doctrine. But sin, in its turn, is a correction and even a revolution with respect to a more archaic conception of fault— the notion of “defilement” conceived in the guise of a strain or blemish that infects from without, Guilt, sin, and defilement thus constitute a primitive diversity in experience. Hence, the feeling involved is not only blind in virtue of being emotional, it is also equivocal, laden with a multiplicity of meanings. This is why language is needed a second time to elucidate the subterranean crises of the consciousness of fault. AssociationValue: 0.6690321439633686


Seg: Finally, the experience of which the believer makes avowal in the confession of sins creates a language for itself by its very strangeness; the experience of being oneself but alienated from oneself gets transcribed immediately on the plane of language in the mode of interrogation. Sin, as alienation from oneself, is an experience even more astonishing, disconcerting, and scandalous, perhaps, than the spectacle of nature, and for this reason it is the richest source of interrogative thought. In the oldest Babylonian psalters the believer asks: “How long, O Lord? What god have I sinned against? What sin have I committed?” Sin makes me incomprehensible to myself: God is hidden; the course of things no longer has meaning. It is in line with this questioning and for the purpose of warding off the threat of meaninglessness that the myth relates “how that began,” and that gnosis elaborates the famous question: iroOev ra koha?—Whence come evils?—and mobilizes all its resources for explanation. Sin is perhaps the most important of the occasions for questioning, but also for reasoning incorrectly by giving premature answers. But just as the transcendental illusion, according to Kant, testifies by its very perplexities that reason is the faculty of the unconditioned, so the unseasonable answers of gnosis and of the etiological myths testify that man’s most moving experience, that of being lost as a sinner, communicates with the need to understand and excites attention by its very character as a scandal.	■ AssociationValue: 0.5787007845766642


Seg: Moreover, the merely semantic understanding that we can acquire from the vocabulary of fault is an exercise preparatory to the hermeneutics of myths. Indeed, it is itself already a hermeneutics, for the most primitive and least mythical language is already ' a symbolic language: defilement is spoken of under the symbol of a stain or blemish, sin under the symbol of missing the mark, of a tortuous road, of trespass, etc. In short, the preferred language of fault appears to be indirect and based on imagery. There is something quite astonishing in this: the consciousness of self seems to constitute itself at its lowest level by means of symbolism and to work out an abstract language only subsequently, by means of a spontaneous hermeneutics of its primary symbols. We shall see later the extensive implications of this assertion. For the moment it is enough to have established that the “re-enactment” in sympathetic imagination always moves in the element of language as reflection reverts from gnosis to myth and from myth to the primaiy symbolic expressions brought into play in the confession of fault. This rever-. sion to the primary symbols permits us henceforth to consider myths and gnosis as secondary and tertiary symbols, the interpretation of which rests on the interpretation of the primary symbols. AssociationValue: 0.9905252187110789


Seg: We must therefore take as a whole the elementary language of confession, the developed language of myths, and the elaborated language of gnosis and counter-gnosis, Speculation is not autonomous and myths themselves are secondary; but neither is there any immediate consciousness of fault that can do without the secondary and tertiary elaborations. It is the whole circle, made up of confession, myth, and speculation, that we must understand, AssociationValue: 0.9666631832808775


Seg: 6.	Last criterion: how to distinguish myth and symbol? It is relatively easy to contrast myth and allegory, but much less easy to distinguish clearly between myth and symbol. Sometimes it seems that symbols are a manner of taking myths in a non-allegon-cal way. Thus, symbol and allegory would be intentional attitudes or dispositions of hermeneutics; and the symbolic and allegonca interpretations would then' be two directions of interpretation ear ing on the same mythical content. Contrarily to this interpretation, AssociationValue: 0.974997366400325


Seg: I shall always understand by symbol, in a much more primitive sense, analogical meanings which are spontaneously formed an immediately significant, such as defilement, analogue of stam; sin, analogue of deviation; guilt, analogue of accusation. These symbols are on the same level as, for example, the meaning of water as threat and as renewal in the flood and in baptism, and fina y on the same level as the most primitive hierophanies. In this sense, symbols are more radical than myths. I shall regard myths as a species of symbols, as symbols developed in the form of narrations and articulated in a time and.a space that cannot be co-ordinated with the time and space of history and geography according to the critical method. For example, exile is a primary symbol of human alienation, but the history of the expulsion of Adam and Eye from Paradise is a mythical narration of the second degree, bringing mto play fabulous personages, places, times, and episodes. Exile is a primary symbol and not a myth, because it is a historical event made to signify human alienation analogically ; but the same alienation creates for itself a fanciful history, the exile from Eden, which, as history that happened in illo tempore, is myth. It will be seen that this thickness of the narrative is essential to myth, without counting the attempt at explanation which, in etiological myths, accentuates their secondary character. I will return to this problem at the beginning of the second part of this study of the symbolism AssociationValue: 0.5975663540732596


Seg: mixture, non-dirtiness., non-obscurity, non-confusion; and this absence plays upon all the stops of the literal meaning and the figurative meaning. KdOaptns itself can express physical cleansing, and then, in the medical sense, evacuation, purgation of humors. But this purgation in its turn can symbolize a ritual purification and then a wholly moral purity. The group Ka9ap6<s-Ka$apai<s thus comes to express intellectual limpidity, clarity of style, orderliness, absence of ambiguity in an oracle, and finally absence of moral blemish or stigma. Thus the word lends itself to the change in meaning by which it will come to express the essential purification, that of wisdom and philosophy. For this, it is true, there will be required the intervention of a new myth which will make the soul exiled in the body the paradigm of an originally pure being, forced into “mixture”; but this Greek adventure of “purification” presupposes that the experience of the pure and the impure was, from the beginning, rich in all these harmonics and “ready for” all these transpositions. AssociationValue: 0.7426632932325012


Seg: biological level, constructed on the model of heredity. But this confusion of categories in the pseudo-concept of hereditary sin reflects intentionally a communal bond attested by the liturgical confession of sins. We must try, then, to recapture, at a stage prior to any speculation concerning the transmission of an individualized sin, the confession of a specific Us> of “us poor sinners,” in which the hyperbiological and hyperhistorical unity of the “people” and even of “humanity” is attested. The Adamic myth expresses this concrete universal, acknowledged in the confession of sins; it expresses it, but does not create it; rather, it presupposes it and only presents it by means of a fanciful explanation. AssociationValue: 0.41686839476904636


Seg: There is no question of denying that the personal imputation of fault marks an advance over the scandalous collective responsibility that permits someone other than the guilty person to be punished. But it must be understood that the price of this advance is the loss of the unity of the human species, gathered together “before God” by the more than biological and more than liistorical bond of fault. The pseudo-concept of original sin is only the rationalization at the third degree, through the Adamic myth, of that enigmatic bond which is acknowledged rather than understood in the “we” of the confession of sins. AssociationValue: 0.35620034855655364


Seg: <26>	We shall see in the next chapter how far the psychological myth of the fall contains a residue of the demonological myth under the figure of the Serpent. AssociationValue: 0.3965320014971831


Seg: Finally, Plato himself, in spite of the Orphic myth of the soul exiled in a body that is its tomb, in spite of the temptation to harden the symbol of bodily captivity into a gnosis of the body as evil, in spite even of the guarantees that he gives to that gnosis for the future, knows perfectly well that the bodily captivity must not be taken literally, but as a sign of the servile will; the “prison” of the body is in the end only “the work of desire,” and “he who co-operates most in putting on the chains is perhaps the chained man himself” (Phaedo, 82d-e). Thus, the captivity of the body and even the captivity of the soul in fhe body are the symbol of the evil that the soul inflicts on itself, tb|e symbol of the affection of freedom by itself; the “loosing” of the soul assures us retrospec- AssociationValue: 0.5486929396174898


Seg: fection” itself. At first glance, this idea is the most difficult to save; it seems forever bound up with the magic of contact. And yet it is the ultimate symbol of the servile will, of the bad choice that binds itself. This schema of infection is in the first place a consequence of the preceding one; it signifies that seduction from the outside is ultimately an affection of the self by the self, an autoinfection, by which the act of binding oneself is transformed into the state of being bound. It is evident that the symbol of enslavement is a necessary step for this taking up of the symbol of defilement into the experience of the servile will; it is by thinking of the yielding of myself to slavery and the reign over myself of the power of evil as identical that I discover the profound significance of a tarnishing of freedom. But perhaps the schema of infection already signifies more than this binding of the self by the self. To infect is not to destroy, to tarnish is not to ruin. The symbol here points toward the relation of radical evil to the very being of man, to the primordial destination of man; it suggests that evil, however positive, however seductive, however affective and infective it may be, cannot make a man something other than a man; infection cannot be a defection, in the sense that the dispositions and functions that make the humanity of man might be unmade, undone, to the point where a reality other than the human reality would be produced. We are still not in a position to understand this ultimate intention of the symbol of defilement; it cannot be brought to light and elaborated except by means of the second-order symbols, especially the myth of the fall. Then we shall understand that evil is not symmetrical with the good, wickedness is not something that replaces the goodness of a man; it is the staining, the darkening, the disfiguring of an innocence, a light,' and a beauty that remain, However radical evil may be, it cannot be as primordial as goodness. The symbol of defilement already says this about the servile will, and it says it through the symbol of captivity; for when a country falls intact into the hands of the enemy, it continues to work, to produce, to create, to exist, but for the enemy; it is responsible, but its work is alienated. This superimposition of servitude on self-determination, which an occupied country may experience, suggests the similar idea of an AssociationValue: 0.39006986565854923


Seg: This new level of expression embarrasses the modern man. In one sense, he alone can recognize the myth as myth, because he alone has reached the point where history and myth become separate. This “crisis,” this decision, after which myth and history are dissociated, may signify the loss of the mythical dimension: AssociationValue: 0.5873431598130251


Seg: because mythical time can no longer be co-ordinated with the time of events that are "historical” in the sense required by historical method and historical criticism, because mythical space can no longer be co-ordinated with the places of our geography, we are tempted to give ourselves up to a radical demythization of all our thinking. But another possibility offers itself to us: precisely because we are living and thinking after the separation of myth and history, the demythization of our history can become the other side of an understanding of myth as myth, and the conquest, for the first time in the histoiy of culture, of the mythical dimension. That is why we never speak here of demythization, but strictly of demythologization, it being well understood that what is lost is the pseudo-knowledge, the false logos of the myth, such as we find expressed, for example, in the etiological function of myths. But when we lose the myth as immediate logos, we rediscover it as myth. Only at the price and by the roundabout way of philosophical exegesis and understanding, can the myth create a new peripeteia of the logos. AssociationValue: 0.7446797047753502


Seg: This conquest of myth as myth is only one aspect of the recognition of symbols and their power to reveal. To understand the myth as myth is to understand what the myth, with its time, its space, its events, its personages, its drama, adds to the revelatory function of the primary symbols worked out above. AssociationValue: 0.9639904537758167


Seg: 2.	The universality of man, manifested through the myths, gets its concrete character from the movement which is introduced into human experience by narration; in recounting the Beginning and the End of fault, the myth confers upon this experience an orientation, a character, a tension. Experience is no longer reduced to a present experience; this present was only an instantaneous cross-section in an evolution stretching from an origin to a fulfillment, from a “Genesis” to,an “Apocalypse.” Thanks to the myth, experience is traversed by the essential history of the perdition and the salvation of man. AssociationValue: 0.638365389573289


Seg: 3.	Still more fundamentally, the myth tries to get at the enigma of human existence, namely, the discordance between the fundamental reality—state of innocence, status of a creature, essential being—and the actual modality of man, as defiled, sinful, guilty. The myth accounts for this transition by means of a narration. But it is a narration precisely because there is no deduction, no logical transition, between the fundamental reality of man and his present existence, between his ontological status as a being created good and destined for happiness and his existential or historical status, experienced under the sign of alienation. Thus the myth has an ontological bearing: it points to the relation—that is to say, both the leap and the passage, the cut and the suture— between the essential being of man and his historical existence. AssociationValue: 0.6701060663744681


Seg: It can already be guessed how far we are from a purely allegorical interpretation of the myth. An allegory can always be translated into a text that can be understood by itself; once this better text has been made out, the allegory falls away like a useless garment; what the allegory showed, while concealing it, can be said in a direct discourse that replaces the allegory. By its triple function of concrete universality, temporal orientation, and finally ontological exploration, the myth has a way of revealing things that is not reducible to any translation from a language in cipher to a clear language. As Schelling has shown in his Philosophy of AssociationValue: 0.7777726526613646


Seg: <51>	As the third book of this work will show, the refusal to reduce the myth to an allegory that can be translated into an intelligible language does not exclude all “interpretation” of myths. We shall propose a type of “interpretation” that is not a “translation”; let us say, to be brief, that the very process of discovery of the field of experience opened up by the myth can constitute an existential verification comparable to the transcendental deduction of the categories of the understanding. Cf. the final chaper of the second book: “The Symbol Gives Rise to Thought.” AssociationValue: 0.6684451785294225


Seg: For a critical understanding of the myth it is first necessary that the myth be entirely divorced from the “etiological” function with which it appears to be identified. This distinction is fundamental for a philosophical handling of the myth; lor the principal objection that philosophy addresses to myth is that the mythical explana- -tion is incompatible with the rationality discovered or invented by the Pre-Socratics; from that time on, it represents the simulacrum of rationality.	. AssociationValue: 0.9735264350078713


Seg: My working hypothesis is that criticism of the pseudo-rational is fatal not to myth, but to gnosis. It is in gnosis that the simulacrum of reason attains realization. Gnosis is what seizes upon and develops the etiological element in myths. The gnosis of evil in particular takes its stand on the ground of reason; as the -word itself makes clear, gnosis tries to be “knowledge.” Between gnosis AssociationValue: 0.7421628099274692


Seg: and reason a choice must be made. But perhaps there is a way of recovering the myth as myth, before it slipped into gnosis, in the nakedness and poverty of a symbol that is not an explanation but an opening up and a disclosure. Our whole effort will be directed toward dissociating myth and gnosis. AssociationValue: 0.44093904540360235


Seg: It is true that the myth is in itself an invitation to gnosis. Furthermore, the problem of evil seems to be the principal occasion of this passage from myth to gnosis. We already know what a powerful incitement to questioning springs from suffering and sin: “How long, O Lord?” “Have I sinned against some divinity?” “Was my act pure?” One might say that the problem of evil offers at the same time the most considerable challenge to think and the most deceptive invitation to talk nonsense, as if evil were an always premature problem where the ends of reason always exceed its means. Long before nature made reason rave and threw it into the transcendental illusion, the contradiction felt between the destination of man, projected in the image of primordial innocence and final perfection, and the actual situation of man, acknowledged and confessed, gave rise to a gigantic “Why?” at the center of the experience of existing. Hence, the greatest explanatory ravings, which compose the considerable literature of gnosis, came into being in connection with that “question.” AssociationValue: 0.9884590163516022


Seg: What, then, was the myth prior to its “etiological” pretensions? What is myth if it is not gnosis? Once more we are brought back to the function of the symbol. The symbol, we have said, opens up and discloses a dimension of experience that, without it, would remain closed and hidden. We must show, then, in what sense the myth is a second-degree function of the primary symbols that we have been exploring up to the present. AssociationValue: 0.9678548102177055


Seg: tory function of gnosis—right down to the most specific traits that distinguish the myth from the primary symbols. Now, it is the narration that adds a new stage of meaning to that of the primary symbols. AssociationValue: 0.8735545202554804


Seg: We shall have recourse here to the interpretation of the mythical consciousness proposed by the phenomenology of religion (Van der Leeuw, Leenhardt, Eliade). At first glance, that interpretation seems to dissolve the myth-narration in an undivided consciousness that consists less in telling stories, making myths, than in relating itself affectively and practically to the whole of things. What is essential for us here is to understand why that consciousness, structured lower than any narration, any fable or legend, nevertheless breaks out into language under the form of narration. If the phenomenologists of religion have been more concerned to go back from the narration to the pre-narrative root of the myth, we shall follow the opposite course from the pre-narrative conscious ness to the mythical narration. It is in this transition that the whole enigma of the symbolic function of myths is centered. AssociationValue: 0.6100872908931019


Seg: Let us transport ourselves behind the myth. According to the phenomenology of religion, the myth-narration is only the verbal envelope of a form of life, felt and lived before being formulated; this form of life expresses itself first in an inclusive mode of behavior relative to the whole of things; it is in the rite rather than in the narration that this behavior is expressed most completely, and the language of the myth is only the verbal segment of this total action. Still more fundamentally, ritual action and mythical AssociationValue: 0.6719638968550276


Seg: 2	“It is necessary to accustom oneself,” says Eliade, “to dissociating the notion of myth from the notions of speech and fable, in order to relate it to the notions of sacred action and significant gesture. The mythical includes not only everything that is told about certain events that happened and certain personages who lived in itlo tempore, but also everything that is AssociationValue: 0.5150928262373541


Seg: language, taken together, point beyond themselves to a model, an archetype, which they imitate or repeat; imitation in gestures and verbal repetition are only the broken expressions of a living participation in an original Act which is the common exemplar of the rite and of the myth. AssociationValue: 0.44388679841207634


Seg: There is no doubt that the phenomenology of religion has profoundly affected the problem of myths by thus going back to a mythical structure which would be the matrix of all the images and all the particular narrations peculiar to this or that mythology, and relating to this diffuse mythical structure the fundamental categories of the myth: participation, relation to the Sacred, etc. AssociationValue: 0.6855000228155493


Seg: It is this mythical structure itself that leads to the diversity of myths. What, in fact, is the ultimate significance of this mythical structure? It indicates, we are told, the intimate accord of the man of cult and myth with the whole of being; it signifies an indivisible plenitude, in which the supernatural, the natural, and the psychological are not yet torn apart. But how does the myth signify this plenitude? The essential fact is that this intuition of a cosmic whole, from which man is not separated, and this undivided plenitude, anterior to the division into supernatural, natural, and human, are not given, but simply aimed at. It is only in intention that the myth restores some wholeness; it is because he himself has lost that wholeness that man re-enacts and imitates it in myth and rite. The primitive man is already a man of division. Hence the myth can only be an intentional restoration or reinstatement and in this sense already symbolical. AssociationValue: 0.9854814204356422


Seg: <53>	One cannot hold at the same time, as G. Gusdorf does in My the et MStaphysique (Paris, 1953), that the myth has a biological, protective role (pp. 12, 21) and that it is “the spontaneous form of being in the world.” All the excessive overestimations of the mythical consciousness, come from AssociationValue: 0.5535067313500963


Seg: Now, in manifesting the purely symbolic character of the relation of man to the lost totality, the myth is condemned from the beginning to division into multiple cycles. There does not exist, in fact, any act of signifying that is equal to its aim. As the study of the primary symbols of fault has already suggested, it is always with something that plays the role of analogon as starting point that the symbol symbolizes; the multiplicity of the symbols is the immediate consequence of their subservience to a stock of analoga, which altogether are necessarily limited in extension and individually are equally limited in comprehension. AssociationValue: 0.4620287051287716


Seg: Levi-Strauss has insisted strongly on the initial discrepancy between the limitation of experience and the totality signified by the myth: “The Universe,” he writes, “signified long before man began to know what it signified ... ; it signified from the beginning the totality of what humanity might expect to know about it”; “man has at his disposal from the beginning an integrality in the significans, about which he is greatly perplexed as to how to allocate it to a significatum, given as such without, however, being known.” This totality, thus signified but so little experienced, becomes available only when it is condensed in sacred beings and objects which become the privileged signs of the significant whole. Hence the primordial diversification of symbols. In fact, there does not exist anywhere in the world a civilization in which this surplus of signification is aimed at. apart from any mythical form or definite ritual. The Sacred takes contingent forms precisely because it is “floating”; and so it cannot be divined except through the this forgetfulness of the distance between experienced conciliation and aimed-at reconciliation. If it is true that "the primitive man is still the man of conciliation and reconciliation, the man of plenitude,” and that he preserves the mark of “that concordance of reality and value that primitive mankind found without difficulty in the myth,” one can no longer understand why the mythical consciousness gives itself up to the tale, to the image, and, in general, to significant speech. AssociationValue: 0.6855037114218455


Seg: indefinite diversity of mythologies and rituals. The chaotic and arbitrary aspect of the world of myths is thus the exact counterpart of the discrepancy between the purely symbolic plenitude and the finiteness of the experience that furnishes man with “analogues” of that which is signified. Narrations and rites, then, are needed to consecrate the contour of the signs of the sacred: holy places and sacred objects, epochs and feasts, are other aspects of the contingency that we find in the narration. If the plenitude were experienced, it would be everywhere in space and time; but because it is only aimed at symbolically, it requires special signs and a discourse on the signs; their heterogeneity bears witness to the significant whole by its contingent outcroppings. Hence, the myth has the function of guarding the finite contours of the signs which, in their turn, refer to the plenitude that man aims at rather than experiences. That is why, although the primitive civilizations have in common almost the same mythical structure, this undifferentiated structure exists nowhere without a diversity of myths; the polarity of the one mythical structure and the many myths is a consequence of the symbolic character of the totality and the plenitude that myths and rites reproduce. Because it is symbolized and not lived, the sacred is broken up into a multiplicity of myths. AssociationValue: 0.7337496650596467


Seg: But why does the myth, when it is broken up, take the form of narration? What we have to understand now is why the original model, in which the myth and the rite lead us to participate, itself affects the character of a drama. It is, in fact, because that which is ultimately signified by every myth is itself in the form of a drama that the narrations in which the mythical consciousness is fragmented are themselves woven of happenings and personages; because its paradigm is dramatic, the myth itself is a tissue of events and is found nowhere except in the plastic form of narration. But why does the narration-myth refer symbolically to a drama? AssociationValue: 0.5906193947510916


Seg: It is because the mythical consciousness not only does not experience the plenitude, but does not even indicate it except at the beginning or the end of a fundamental History. The plenitude that the myth points to symbolically is established, lost, and re- AssociationValue: 0.8549727133133204


Seg: established dangerously, painfully. Thus it is not given, not only because it is signified and not experienced, but because it is signified through a combat. The myth, as well as the rite, receives from this primordial drama the mode of discourse peculiar to narration. The plastic character of the myth, with its images and events, results, then, both from the necessity of providing contingent signs for a purely symbolic Sacred and from the dramatic character of the primordial time. Thus the time of the myth is diversified from the beginning by the primordial drama. AssociationValue: 0.7546841408829073


Seg: The myths concerning the origin and the end of evil that we are now going to study constitute only a limited sector of myths and furnish only a partial verification of the working hypothesis set forth in this introduction. At least they give us direct access to the primordially dramatic structure of the world of myths. We recall the three fundamental characteristics ascribed above to the myths of evil: the concrete universality conferred upon human experience by means of archetypal personages, the tension of an ideal history oriented from a Beginning toward an End, and finally the transition from an essential nature to an alienated history; these three functions of the myths of evil are three aspects of one and the same dramatic structure. Hence, the narrative form is neither secondary nor accidental, but primitive and essential. The myth performs its symbolic function by the specific means of narration because what it wants to express is already a drama. It is this primordial drama that opens up and discloses the hidden meaning of human experience; and so the myth that recounts it assumes the irreplaceable function of narration. AssociationValue: 0.6365321019852136


Seg: tality which is not perceived, not experienced, but signified, aimed at, conjured up. The language of the confession of sins, then, is only a fragment of a vaster language that indicates mythically the origin and the end of fault, and the totality in which it arose. If we detach the living experience from the symbol, we take away from the experience that which completes its meaning. Now, it is the myth as narration that puts the present experience of fault into relation with the totality of meaning. AssociationValue: 0.9742831134229323


Seg: go to the encounter with experience with a key for deciphering it in our hands and to orient ourselves in the labyrinth of the mythologies of evil, and a posteriori, always subject to correction and amendment through contact with experience. I should like to think, as Cl. L£vi-Strauss does in Tristes Tropiques, that the images which the myth-making imagination and the institutional activity of man can produce are not infinite in number, and that it is possible to work out, at least as a working hypothesis, a sort of morphology of the principal images. AssociationValue: 0.9763109291295867


Seg: 4.	Altogether marginal to this triad of myths, there is a solitary myth that has played a considerable part in our Western culture, because it presided, if not over the birth, at least over the growth of Greek philosophy. This myth, which we shall call "the myth of the exiled soul” differs from all the others in that it divides man into soul and body and concentrates on the destiny of the soul, which, it depicts as coming from elsewhere and straying here below, while the cosmogonic, or theogonic, background of the other myths receives little emphasis. One test of our typology— and that not the least—will be to understand why the myth of the exiled soul and the myth of the fault of a primeval man could sometimes merge and blend their influences in an indistinct myth of the fall, although these two myths are profoundly heterogeneous, and the secret affinities of the Biblical myth of the fall carry it toward the myth of chaos and the tragic myth rather than toward the myth of the exiled soul. AssociationValue: 0.9869545089873824


Seg: Thus our "typology” ought not to be confined to an attempt at classification; we must go beyond the statics of classification to a dynamics that has as its task the discovery of the latent life of the myths and the play of their secret affinities. It is this dynamics that must prepare the way for a philosophic recapture of the myth. AssociationValue: 0.9590884601214135


Seg: genesis of the world, it recounts the genesis of the divine; the birth of the present world order and the appearance of man, such as he exists now, are the last act of a drama that concerns the generation of the gods. This coming-to-be of the divine has a considerable significance on the level of “types”; <54><55> this myth, which AssociationValue: 0.5299240680211982


Seg: clearly seen the difference between the Orphic myth and the Babylonian myth of men created with the blood of a god. AssociationValue: 0.7396749451171503


Seg: It seems to me, then, that the absence of a genuine myth of the fall in the Sumero-Babylonian culture is the counterpart of the vision of the world set forth in their myths of creation. Where evil is primordial and primordially involved in the very coming-to-be of the gods, the problem that might be resolved by a myth of the AssociationValue: 0.3176859921770313


Seg: <75>3 See the chapter on the Adamic myth, A. Heidel has seen this discontinuity very clearly {op. cit., p. 126): the essential point in the Babylonian theme is the victory of Marduk over the savage earlier gods, and the cosmogony is a part of the theogony; in the Bible, the essentia point is the creation of the world, and cosmogony is divorced from theogony. The first verse of Genesis expresses this typological difference; Heidel gives an exegesis of it (op. cit., pp. 128-40). The creation of man also ceases to belong to theogony; autonomy and responsibility are aimed at, rather than service to the gods (ibid., pp. 118-22). Finally, the author has seen clearly that the fall of man is substituted for the guilt of the gods (ibid., pp. 122-26). AssociationValue: 0.30663112897135913


Seg: vanquished myth in the culture of the people; aided by this sort of inertia of images, the new myth works a slow transmutation in them until it carries them to the level of the new “myth.” AssociationValue: 0.4638895265979068


Seg: The ideology of the king may, indeed, continue to nourish the theme of the kingship of man, or that of man as the son of God, image of God, little lower than a God; but the wickedness of man, however kingly, discovered in the course of several centuries of prophetic accusation, remains without roots in the creation, now that the creation is without drama. A new myth, purely anthropological, will be needed to take the place of the old cosmic myth. The figure of the Urmensch will then have to be detached from the figure of the King; his fault will have to constitute a radical novelty in the good creation. It is this need which will be fulfilled by the Adamic myth. AssociationValue: 0.4448256025532328


Seg: Nevertheless, the Promethean myth, at least in Hesiod, is not completely emancipated from its theogonic matrix; it continues to share in the defeat of the Titanic and chthonian elements belonging to the origin of things and to the genesis of the divine itself. Prometheus does not invent evil; he continues it; his guile is a sequel to the guile displayed in the theogonic combats. AssociationValue: 0.6571130368740624


Seg: Perhaps it is among the Orphics that the myth of the Titan gets its closest association with an anthropogony. The Orphic myth, we shall see, is in general a myth of man, a myth of “soul” and “body”; “the crime of the Titans,” who dismembered and devoured AssociationValue: 0.731454822295819


Seg: the young god Dionysos, becomes the origin of man; from their ashes Zens raised up the present race of men, who thus have a twofold inheritance from god and Titan; the myth of the Titan is henceforth an etiological myth, designed to account for the present condition of man; it is detached completely from the theogonic background to become the first link in an anthropogony. Plato’s words in the Laws about the “Titanic nature” of man are perhaps the best testimony for this shift in the theme of the Titan from theogony towards anthropogony. AssociationValue: 0.7459784677962218


Seg: the “adamig” myth is the anthropological myth par excellence; Adam means Man. But not every myth of “the primordial man” is an “Adamic” myth. Each of the other types of myth includes some reference to man: thus the figure of the King, in the theo-gonic myth, gives substance to a certain sort of history and to a . certain sort of political reality; but the origin of evil is not attributed to man in any peculiar sense in that myth. Likewise, the figure of the Titan, which fluctuates among the various types of myth, is very close to changing into the figure of the primordial man; but the Orphic “anthropogony,” which annexed the myth of the Titans to itself—at a late date, no doubt,—does not constitute an anthropogonic myth of evil: the being of man is itself the result of a drama anterior to man; the evil is that there are human beings; the genesis of evil coincides with anthropogony. Many other representations of the primordial man will be found at the gnostic level of speculation; but those speculations differ fundamentally from the Adamic theme because in them the genesis of the present condition of man is regularly considered as identical with the evil process displayed in the “eons” anterior to the present condition of man. AssociationValue: 0.637734581254733


Seg: Only the “Adamic” myth is strictly anthropological. This means' that it has three characteristics. In the first place, the etiological myth relates the origin of evil to an ancestor of the human race as it is now whose condition is homogeneous with ours. All the speculations on the supernatural perfection of Adam before the fall are adventitious contrivances which profoundly alter the original nai've, brute meaning; they tend to make Adam superior and hence a stranger to our condition, and at the same time they reduce the Adamic myth to a genesis of man from a primordial superhumanity. There is no doubt that the very word “fall,” which is foreign to the Biblical vocabulary, is contemporaneous with the elevation of the “Adamic” condition above the present human condition; only what has first been elevated falls. The symbol of the fall, then, is not the authentic symbol of the "Adamic” myth; moreover, it is found in Plato, in gnosis, in Plotinus. That is why we have not called this chapter “The Myth of the Fall,” but “The Adamic Myth.” When we have traced the roots of the symbolism of the Adamic myth back to the more fundamental symbolism of sin, we shall see that the Adamic myth is a myth of “deviation,” or “going astray,” rather than a myth of the “fall.” AssociationValue: 0.953058033936402


Seg: Second characteristic: the etiological myth of Adam is the most extreme attempt to separate the origin of evil from the origin of the good; its intention is to set up a radical origin of evil distinct from the more primordial origin of the goodness of things. Whatever the strictly philosophical difficulties of this attempt may be, the distinction between radical and primordial is essential to the anthropological character of the Adamic myth; it is that which makes man a beginning of evil in the bosom of a creation which has already had its absolute beginning in the creative act of God. At the time when the Adamic myth was composed, the concept of freedom had not yet been elaborated as a support for this, so to speak, second beginning, although , the Deuteronomic idea of a radical ■choice imposed by the prophetic summons portends the evolution of the Adamic myth toward a speculation of g higher degree, in which freedom will be not only a sort of beginning, but the power of the creature to defect—that is to say, in the strict sense, the power of the human creature to undo (difaire), and to unmake AssociationValue: 0.6137109393270218


Seg: himself (se defaire), after he has been made {fait) and made perfect (par-fait). On the level of the myth, to which we confine ourselves here, this power of defection which belongs to freedom is still only implicit in the structure of the story; it is represented by a happening that looms up, one does not know where from, and that distinguishes a before from an after. In the terminology of the fall, about which we have expressed reservations above, there is a supralapsarian state of innocence and an infralapsarian state of peccability. (Let us note, in passing, that fallibility and peccability are not identical. “Fallibility,” in the sense given to it in Book I, denotes the human structure capable of departing from the right way out of malignancy, while “peccability” describes the condition of mankind when they are already inclined to evil. That is why we speak of peccability here in the sense of a habitus of the species; we shall discuss it at length in Book III.) The passage from innocence to sin as the status of a man destined for good and inclined to evil is narrated by the Adamic myth as something that happened. But because the origin of evil is narrated as a story about something that happened, and because that story is connected with a Iegen-. dary character, Adam, we are not yet in the presence of speculation, but only of an etiological myth. No doubt the myth is ready to be taken over by speculation, but it is still immersed in mythical space and time; and so it must be understood as a myth, half-way between the primordial symbols and the speculative symbols created by gnosis, or against gnosis, AssociationValue: 0.9915876229874682


Seg: possible what we shall call further on a system of the myths of evil. But, however far it may be possible to go in the direction of this multiplication of the centers of proliferation of evil, the central intention of the myth is to order all the other figures in relation to the figure of Adam, and to understand them in conjunction with him and as peripheral figures in the story which has Adam as its principal protagonist. AssociationValue: 0.3141620456738771


Seg: In the first place, it means accepting the fact that it is a myth. We shall say further on how Jewish thought could "work out this chronicle of a first human pair; but it must be well understood from the outset that, for the modern man who has learned the distinction between myth and history, this chronicle of the first man and the first pair can no longer be co-ordinated with the time of history and the space of geography as these have been irreversibly constituted by critical awareness. It must be well understood that the question, Where and when did Adam eat the forbidden fruit?, no longer has meaning for us; every effort to save the letter of the story as a true history is vain and hopeless. What we know, as men of science, about the beginnings of mankind leaves no place for such a primordial event. I am convinced that the full accept- AssociationValue: 0.553490779865878


Seg: 1A clear attitude is preferable to the attitude of authors like A. M. Dubarle (op. cit.} pp. 45-60) who try to evade the choice between history and myth and to find in this story “a history of a special type, which employs traditional imagery as a means of expression while profoundly transforming its import” (p. 49). It is true that Israel, whose religion is founded on an historical event, the exodus from Egypt, could not appeal to some non-temporal "archetype” for an explanation of evil, but only to events supposed to be the source of the present; but to say that Israel rediscovered past events by faith is inevitably to come back to the idea that Adam was a real person and that the fall was an event that really took place. We must keep the idea of event as a symbol of the break between two ontological regimes and abandon the idea of past fact. In particular, we must recognize the mythical character of the figure of the ancestor of the human race, supposed to be for all mankind what the eponymous ancestor is for Moab, Edom, etc. It is in this schematization that there arises the idea of a sin supposed to be first and inherited, as well as the false rationalizations to which it gave rise. AssociationValue: 0.747387542348161


Seg: ance of the non-historical character of the myth—non-historical if we take history in the sense it has for the critical method—is the other side of a great discovery: the discovery. of the symbolic function of the myth. But then we should not say, “The story of the ‘fall is only a myth”—that is to say, something less than history—but, “The story of the fall has the greatness of myth”—that is to say, has more meaning than a true history. But what meaning? AssociationValue: 0.9689603256304636


Seg: We have suggested repeatedly that the meaning resides in the power of the myth to evoke speculation on the power of defection that freedom has. Hence, that meaning is to be sought in the relation of the pre-philosophical to the philosophical, according to the AssociationValue: 0.9499927355279836


Seg: maxim which has been and will be our guiding star throughout this book: “The symbol gives rise to thought.” But this heuristic, exploratory power of the myth turned in the direction of the speculation that follows it cannot be disengaged from the etiological function of the myth unless we first treat the myth as a rehandling of the fundamental symbols elaborated in the living experience of defilement, sin, and guilt. The myth anticipates speculation only because it is already an interpretation, a hermeneutics of the primordial symbols in which tlie prior consciousness of sin gave itself form. That it gives rise, in its turn, to thought is a consequence of the fact that it itself interprets other symbols. It is thus that we shall seek to understand it in this chapter, reserving for a later investigation the second-degree rehandling of it in the more intel-lectualized symbols of “original sin.” So we shall distinguish three levels: first that of the primorial symbols of sin, then that of the Adamic myth, and finally the speculative cipher of original sin; and we shall understand the second as first-degree hermeneutics, the third as second-degree hermeneutics. AssociationValue: 0.9891551376787535


Seg: This way of understanding is supported by the historical experience of the Jewish people. So far is the Adamic myth from being the point of departure for their experience of sin and guilt that it presupposes that experience and marks its maturity. That is why it was possible to understand the experience and to interpret its fundamental symbols—deviation, revolt, going astray, perdition, captivity—without recourse to that myth. Our problem will be to understand what the “Adamic” myth adds to those first symbols. In every way the addition is belated and, in certain respects, nonessential, as the history of Hebrew literature superabundantly proves. Adam is not an important figure in the Old Testament: the Prophets ignore him, various texts do, indeed, name Adam (subject of a verb in the plural) and the sons of Adam, but without allusion to the story of the fall; Abraham, the father of believers, and Noah, the father of mankind as recreated after the flood, are more important figures; and even for the editor of the account in Genesis it is not certain that Adam bears the entire responsibility for the evil in the world; he is perhaps only the first example of evil. In 2 Ben Sirach, author of Ecclesiasticus, and Wisdom allude to the account AssociationValue: 0.5012181800598544


Seg: Hence, it is false that the “Adamic” myth is the keystone of the Judeo-Ghristian edifice; it is only a flying buttress, articulated upon the ogival crossing of the Jewish penitential spirit. With even more reason, original sin, being a rationalization of the second degree, is only a false column. The harm that has been done to souls, during the centuries of Christianity, first by the literal interpretation of the story of Adam, and then by the confusion of this myth, treated as history, with later speculations, principally Augustinian, about original sin, will never be adequately told. In asking the faithful to confess belief in this mythico-speculative mass and to accept it as a self-sufficient explanation, the theologians have unduly required a sacrificium intellectus where what was needed was to awaken believers to a symbolic superintelligence of their actual condition. AssociationValue: 0.9674906791419869


Seg: Not that the myth is a vain repetition of the penitential experience of the Jews; we have insisted too much on the triple function of the myth—as universalization of experience, as establishment of a tension between a beginning and an end, and as investigation of the relations between the primordial and the historical—to scorn the contribution of the myth, But this contribution cannot be understood except by starting from the impulsion that the myth receives from the experience which precedes it and from the symbols in which that experience took shape. AssociationValue: 0.9742828940479514


Seg: The living experience of the Jewish confession doubly prepares the way for the emeigence of the myth: negatively and positively. AssociationValue: 0.3874351721714897


Seg: religious consciousness, Creation is no longer conflict but “word”: God says, and it is so. The "jealousy” of Yahweh is no longer that of the tragic god offended by heroic greatness; it is the "jealousy” of holiness with regard to "idols”; it is the monotheistic "jealousy” which reveals the vanity, the nothingness of false gods. Isaiah’s vision in the Temple (Is. 6) bears witness both to the new discovery of the Holy God. and to the waning of the theogonic and tragic god. The purely anthropological conception of the origin of evil is the counterpart of this general "demythologization” of theogony: because “Yahweh reigns by his Word,” because "God is Holy,” evil must enter into the world by a sort of catastrophe in the created, a catastrophe that the new myth will endeavor to gather up into one event and one story in which original badness is dissociated from primordial goodness. This motivation is not without analogy to that of Plato in Book II of the Republic: because God is the Good, he is innocent. But whereas Plato concludes: God, then, is not the cause of everything, nor even of the greater part of existing things, the Jewish thinker continues: God is the cause of everything that is good and man is the cause of everything that is vain.	, AssociationValue: 0.3443813750388198


Seg: Now, at the same time as the ethical monotheism of the Jews was destroying the basis of all the other myths, it was working out the positive motifs of a strictly "anthropological” myth of the origin of evil. AssociationValue: 0.5809943141611514


Seg: the root of his actions. I do not venture to say “for his being”— first, because he never formed that ontological concept, and, second, because the purpose of the myth of the fall is to dissociate the historical starting point of evil from the starting point, which we moderns can call ontological, of creation. At least his repentance penetrates to the “heart” of man, to his purpose—that is to say, to the monadic source of his many actions. Furthermore, at the same time as his piety discovers the personal dimension of sin, it also discovers its communal dimension; the evil “heart” of each is also the evil “heart” of all; a specific we, namely, “we sinners,” unifies all mankind in an undivided guilt. Thus the spirit of repentance discovered something beyond our acts, an evil root that is both individual and collective, such as a choice that each would make for all and all for each. AssociationValue: 0.3173480043986394


Seg: It was because the confession of sins involved this virtual universalization that the Adamic myth was possible: the myth, in naming Adam, man, makes explicit the concrete universality of human evil; the spirit of repentance gives to itself, in the Adamic myth, the symbol of that universality. AssociationValue: 0.8461677075901566


Seg: The proto-historical myth thus served not only to generalize the experience of Israel, applying it to all mankind, at all times and in all places, but also to extend to all mankind the great tension between condemnation and mercy that the teaching of the Prophets had revealed in the particular destiny of Israel, <83> . Finally, there is the last function of the myth as it was motivated in the faith of Israel: the myth prepares the way for speculation by exploring the point of rupture between the ontological and the historical. The confession of sins drew nearer to this point of rupture as it gained in depth, and it discovered it by means of a paradox. It is the holiness of God that reveals the abyss of sin in man; but, on the other hand, if the root of sin is in the “nature,” in the “being” of man, then the sin revealed by the holiness of AssociationValue: 0.6716200912804535


Seg: God returns upon Him and accuses the Creator of having made man evil. If I repent of my being, I accuse God in the same moment in which he accuses me, and the spirit of repentance explodes under the pressure of that paradox. Thus, the myth appears at a point of high tension in the penitential experience; its function is to posit a “beginning” of evil .distinct from the “beginning” of creation, to posit an event by which sin entered into the world and, by sin, death. The myth of the fall is thus the myth of the first appearance of evil in a creation already completed and good. By thus dividing the Origin into an origin of the goodness of the created and an origin of the wickedness in history, the myth tends to satisfy the twofold confession of the Jewish believer, 'who acknowledges, on the one hand, the absolute perfection of God and, on the other hand, the radical wickedness of man, This twofold confession is the very essence of his repentance. AssociationValue: 0.9867618677006738


Seg: Let us try now to understand the structure of the myth by beginning with its intention, suggested by the primary experience of sin. The Adamic myth, as narrated by the “Yahwist” editor of Genesis III, obeys a twofold rhythm. On the one hand, it tends to concentrate all the evil of history in a single man, in a single act—in short, in a unique event, That is how St, Paul understood it: “As by one man sin entered into the world. , . .” By this extreme contraction of the origin of evil into one point the Biblical account emphasizes the irrationality of that cleavage, that deflection, that leap, which tradition, not without ambiguity, has called the fall. AssociationValue: 0.6008346278809419


Seg: On the other hand, the myth spreads out the event in a “drama,” which takes time, introduces a succession of incidents, and brings several characters into the action. In being extended in time and scattered among several roles, the drama gets a turbid ambiguity which contrasts with the frank rupture of the evil event. Let us try to comprehend this dialectical play between the “event” of the fall and the “space of time” of the temptation. AssociationValue: 0.8510050612499775


Seg: This discrepancy at the heart of our story is of great interest. Far from leading us to consider the suppressed myth as a residue and a survival, it invites us to interrogate the tension between the cultural and sexual implications of creation and the implications of the fall. The fact that there are two interpretations of civilization and of sexuality is by itself full of meaning; every dimension of man—language, work, institutions, sexuality—is stamped with the twofold mark of being destined for the good and inclined toward evil. This duality is spread out by the myth in mythical time, just as Plato, in the myth of the Politicus, supposes a succession of two periods of the Cosmos, the movement forward and the movement backward, which we experience in the inextricable melange of the temporal intentio and distentio. AssociationValue: 0.6888509822575495


Seg: If now we ask the meaning of that innocence which the myth projects as a “before,” we can answer: to say that it is lost is still to say something about it; it is to posit it in order at least to cancel it. Innocence here plays the role of the Kantian thing-in-itself: it is thought of to the extent of being posited, but it is not known; that is enough to give it the negative role of a limit in relation to the pretensions of the phenomenon to be coextensive with being. To posit the world as that into which sin entered, or innocence as AssociationValue: 0.5892027689532098


Seg: Thereby the possibility arises of interpreting the two states of innocence and sin no longer as successive, but as superimposed; sin does not succeed innocence, but, in the Instant, loses it. In the Instant I am created, in the Instant I fall. In the Instant I am created: my pristine goodness is my status as a created being; but I do not cease to be a created being unless I cease to be; therefore I do not cease to be good. Then the “event” of sin terminates innocence in the Instant; it is, in the Instant, the discontinuity, the breach between my having been created and my becoming evil. The myth puts in succession that which is contemporaneous and cannot not be contemporaneous; it makes an "earlier” state of innocence terminate in an instant that begins the “later” state of accursedness. But that is how it attains its depth; in telling of the fall as an event, springing up from an unknown source, it furnishes anthropology with a key concept: the contingency of that radical evil which the penitent is always on the point of calling his evil nature. Thereby the myth proclaims the purely "historical” character of that radical evil; it prevents it from being regarded as primordial evil. Sin may be "older” than sins, but innocence is still “older.” The “anteriority” of innocence to the “oldest” sin is, as it were, the temporal cipher of a profound anthropological fact. By the myth anthropology is invited, in the first place, to AssociationValue: 0.482781739276974


Seg: gather all the sins of the world into a sort of transhistorical unity, symbolized by the first man; then to put the stamp of contingency on that radical evil; and finally to .preserve, superimposed on one another, the goodness of created man and the wickedness of historical man, while “separating” the one from the other by the “event” which the myth tells of as the first sin of the first man. AssociationValue: 0.5681186110114858


Seg: But the same myth that focuses the “event” of the fall in one man, one act, one instant, also spreads it out among several characters—Adam, Eve, the serpent—and several episodes—the seduction of the "woman and the fall of the man. Hence, a second reading offers itself, in which the “passage” from innocence to fault gets the sense of an insensible transition and no longer that of a sudden occurrence. The myth is both the myth of the caesura and the myth of. transition, the myth of the act and that of motivation, the myth of an evil choice and that of temptation, the myth of the Instant and that of a lapse of time. Under this second aspect the myth tries to fill up the interval between innocence and the fall by a sort of dizziness from which the evil act emerges as if by fascination. But in articulating the event of the fall upon the duration of the dizziness, the Yahwist gives his story a second pole— the serpent; the serpent is a figure of the transition. Furthermore, the mediation of the serpent is itself linked with another figure— that of the woman, Eve, Life. Thus the myth multiplies intermediaries, countering the irrationality of the Instant. AssociationValue: 0.3986310227862052


Seg: bar the way against man by his prohibitions, man seeks his freedom in the unlimitedness of the Principle of existence and forms the wish to posit himself in being as a creator of himself by himself. Moreover, the serpent has not spoken altogether falsely; the era opened up to freedom by fault is a certain experience of infinity that hides from us the finite situation of the creature, the ethical finiteness of man. Henceforth the evil infinite of human desire— always something else, always something more—which animates the movement of civilizations, the appetite for pleasure, for possessions, for power, for knowledge—seems to constitute the reality of man. The restlessness that makes us discontented with the present seems to be our true nature, or rather the absence of nature that makes us free. In a way, the promise of the serpent marks the birth of a human history drawn by its idols towards the infinite; all phenomenology develops in this enchanted precinct of vanity, under the category of the Pseudo, That is why no phenomenology, no science of appearances, can take the place of a critique of the illusion of appearance. The myth is the symbolic form of that critique. AssociationValue: 0.4305974192950942


Seg: We have penetrated into the forest of meanings created by th|| Adamic symbol. The moment has come to restore to that symbofS its motion: it is a symbol of the beginning and it was adopted hjjj the Biblical writer whom we call the Yahwist with a lively awafeffl ness that it is a restrospective symbol closely bound up with a wholffl historical experience turned toward the future. We are not cob® cerned here to reconstruct the whole theology of history underlying that experience, but to find a solution to a precise problem, whiqjfg is this: Are there, in that experience and that theology of historyfj symbols of the End which are homogeneous with the symbolism offl the Beginning developed by the Adamic myth? Hence the problert|J we are proposing here is a problem of agreement of symbol witltlj symbol; what is at stake is the coherence of the "type” for whicM the Adamic symbol is the ultimate retrospective symbol. In otherl words, we are trying to discover that which corresponds, in th<p Biblical type, to the “cultual-ritual” re-enactment (and to the figure! of the King which is subordinate to it) in the cosmic-drama, "type,’ll or that which corresponds to the spectacle, the emotion, and thef wisdom of tragedy, or, again, that which corresponds to the odyssey® of the soul in the Orphic myth. We shall attempt to answer thisjj question within the limits of an investigation of symbols.	;|| AssociationValue: 0.7672549155951551


Seg: But it is difficult to put oneself all at once in the presence of JgV this symbolism, to which it can be justly objected that it is not at the level of the Adamic symbol, since it acquired literary existence ■. ^ only in late and esoteric Judaism (book of Daniel, IV Ezra, Ethi-§fV opian book of Enoch), in the Gospels, and in the Pauline epistles, |;; We must place ourselves, then, at the level of the Adamic myth, §V begin with the response to that myth in the same cultural milieu, IV and then try to follow the progressive enrichment of the figures or IV images that answer from the beginning to that of Adam, in order to overtake the symbols of the Son of Man and the Second Adam. AssociationValue: 0.5552407882551151


Seg: Perhaps it is necessary to have assimilated this succession of figures in order to understand the one which insures the ultimate symmetry between the Adamic figure of the myth of origin and the series of eschatological figures—namely, the figure of the “second Adam,” dear to St. Paul. If Son of Man means Man and if Adam also means Man, the question is fundamentally of the same thing (although St. Paul never uses the expression Son of Man, but speaks only of the "second Adam,” the “last Adam,” the “Adam who is to come”). This new figure at the same time consecrates the preceding ones and adds a decisive trait to them. On the one hand, it supposes the fusion of the two figures of the Son of Man and the suffering servant, as well as the relation between a single figure of Man and the whole of mankind, between “one” and “many.” On the other hand, the new meaning that St. Paul gives to the comparison of the two Adams is decisive for a retrospective understanding of the whole series of the earlier eschatological figures. What particularly interests us here is that, in AssociationValue: 0.35569930482039314


Seg: “progressivist” theologies of history which, even if they go considerably beyond the intentions of the first Christian theologian, are manifestly prolongations of his “how much more” and his “in order that.” The Church itself in its liturgy sings: O certe neces-sarium Adae peccatum quod Christi morte deletum est! O felix culpa, quae talem ac tantum meruit habere Redemptorem! That hymn celebrates only the greatness of the Redeemer; but the “greatness” of the Redeemer is also the “greatness” of the new creation. That is why there is less of error in the interpretation of the Adamic myth given by German idealism <100> than in all the dreams of a return to an earlier paradise. Kant, in the Mutkmass-licher Anfang der Menschengeschichte, sees the good of the species issuing from the evil of the individual; and, in the Religion within the Limits of Pure Reason (I, IV), he understands the fall, free and fated, of man as the painful road of all ethical life that is of an adult character and on an adult level. What is properly Paulin-ian, and what the Greek and Latin Fathers commented on fervently, <101> is that, by a miraculous initiative on the part of God, the AssociationValue: 0.9895330991178636


Seg: the new “type” of myth that we have now to consider is the one which all anthropological dualism endeavors to transpose and rationalize. What distinguishes it from all the other types is that it divides man into “soul” and “body”; it is on the basis of this myth that man understands himself as the same as his “soul” and “other than his “body.” AssociationValue: 0.7935233032483405


Seg: Let us disregard for the moment the difficult question where and when this myth attained its final literary form. It has been said that the type which we are here setting forth was perfectly exemplified by archaic Orphism; there has even been an inclination to identify the myth of the exiled soul purely and simply with the Orphic myth. But, as we know, the problems raised by Orphism for the history of religions and the history of Greek thought are considerable, and we shall not attempt to conceal them. We know that all of Platonic and Neo-Platonic philosophy presupposes Orphism and draws nourishment from its substance, but we do not know exactly what sort of Orphism Plato was acquainted with and what the irakatbs Aoyo? of Orphism was like before the late revisions of the myth, That is why we must approach history armed with a theory of types such as we find in Max Weber’s Idealtypen, but prepared to correct the ideal outline of the "myth AssociationValue: 0.5411812022634948


Seg: The mythical schema of the exiled soul can be understood through a comparison with the three other schemata which we have examined. It then becomes apparent that this myth is the only one which is, in the proper sense of the word, a myth of the “soul” and at the same time a myth of the "body.” It tells how the "soul,” divine in its origin, became human—how the "body,” a stranger to the soul and bad in many ways, falls to the lot of the soul—how the mixture of the soul and the body is the event that inaugurates the humanity of man and makes man the place of forgetting, the place where the primordial difference between soul and body is abolished. Divine as to his soul, earthly as to his body, man is the forgetting of the difference; and the myth tells how that happened. ' AssociationValue: 0.9833314885301492


Seg: to a myth of origin which would make evil the contrary of that enthusiasm, the reverse of that madness, and which would declare that our sojourn here below is itself intrinsically evil. AssociationValue: 0.5035853461215007


Seg: Finally, no myth is fundamentally less “psychic” than the Biblical myth of the fall. It is, of course, an anthropological myth, and even the anthropological myth par excellence, the only one, perhaps, that expressly makes man the origin (or. the co-origin) of evil; but it is not in any degree a myth of the adventures of the “soul” considered as a separate entity. On the contrary, it is a myth of the “flesh,” of the undivided existence of man. Whatever may be the later confusions of Christianity and Neo-Platonism, which in a certain fashion retains the essential traits of the Orphic myth, the dualistic myth and the myth of thb fall are radically heterogeneous, and the task of typology is to complete that difference by stylizing the myths. AssociationValue: 0.983634714787767


Seg: If now we turn to the literary documents, we find the following situation: the Platonic philosophy presupposes a 7raAatos Aoyos —an “ancient discourse”—distinct from the Homeric and Hesiodic theogonies and traditionally called Orphic, which it transposes, integrates with its reflection on the soul, and rationalizes. Thus it makes the myth its origin, one of the non-philosophical origins of philosophy. Moreover, as we shall insist at the end of this chapter, there is a pact between this myth and philosophy which has no equivalent in any other myth. Philosophy breaks with the theogonic myth, it breaks with the tragic myth and its un avow able theology; but, after the sophistic crisis, it recharges itself in the Orphic myth and draws therefrom a new substance and a new depth. Plato himself shattered the tragic myth and transposed the TraAaios Ao'yos from Orphism; it is in this sense that “philosophy” presupposes Orphism. Unfortunately that iraXaw? Ao'yo? is not to be AssociationValue: 0.5023702239771273


Seg: We do, indeed, possess an etiological myth that is called “Or-::-phic”; but that myth is attested, in its complete form, only by the; Neo-Platonists, by Damascius and Proclus, This is an astonishing; situation: the perfect Orphic myth is post-philosophical. The myth is well known: the infant Dionysos was assassinated by the cunning and cruel Titans, who thereupon boiled and devoured the members; of the god; Zeus, to punish them, blasted them with lightning and -from their ashes created the present race of men. That is why men ted ay participate both in the evil nature of the Titans and in the divine nature of Dionysos, whom the Titans had assimilated in the course of their horrible feast. It is a very fine myth, a true myth of original sin. The mixture that constitutes the present condition of human beings stems from an anterior, pre-human, superhuman crime, and so evil is inherited; it points back to an event that inaugurates the confusion of two natures which had before been separate. That event is a murder which signifies both the death of a god and participation in the divine. Yes, it is a very fine myth. Unfortunately 'we have no means of proving that it belonged, in this final form, to the “ancient discourse” of Orphism; indeed, we have reasons for suspecting that it is a Neo-Platonic invention, created for the pleasure and the profit of a philosophizing exegesis of myths. AssociationValue: 0.5184283999730784


Seg: Caught between a myth that is pre-philosophical, but not to be found, and a myth that is perfect, but post-philosophical, the phenomenologist is indeed embarrassed. The situation would be desperate if it were not possible to distinguish from the fully worked out etiological myth, which is perhaps contemporaneous with the philosophical exegesis of it, a myth of situation—a myth of the present situation of man—which reveals “soul” and “body” as distinct magnitudes and powers, although it remains silent concerning the origin of their confusion. This myth of a primordial distinction is not undiscoverable; it can be reconstructed on the sole basis of the documents of the archaic and classical epoch; it is, by itself, the “ancient discourse” presupposed by philosophy. With respect to AssociationValue: 0.5540840025142884


Seg: the etiological myth and in comparison with the other etiological myths of evil, it is an embryonic myth; but perhaps it will be possible to show that the famous later myth is an orthodox explication of the archaic schema and that it is in perfect agreement with it. Thus we have no need to suppose that the etiological myth is ancient in order to give substance to the iraXaios Aoyos invoked by Plato. AssociationValue: 0.9699963120881083


Seg: It is noteworthy that Plato, in the fanciful etymology he proposes for “body” in the Cratylus, does not ascribe to the Orphics the exegesis of n&na by erij/m, but declares that the Orphics “imposed that name”; and this is the important thing. It has already been remarked that the Homeric hero does not have a “body,” but “members”; the body becomes a simple entity only in contrast with the "soul” and in virtue of the mythical symbolism which confers upon it a destiny other than that of the soul. Through the myth the body became an eschatological force: AssociationValue: 0.6875746303481053


Seg: We have here the nucleus of the situational myth, prior to the anthropogony of the myth of origin. It does not yet make the body the origin of evil; the soul seems rather to bring with it an anterior evil, which it expiates in the body. But this enclosure “in the likeness of a prison” receives from its penal character its own peculiar significance of alienation; in becoming an instrument of expiation, the body becomes a place of exile. It is no longer an expressive sign, according to another fanciful etymology which also identifies AssociationValue: 0.9774970573312656


Seg: Perhaps we must go still further. If we compare what we have just said about the "divinity” of the soul .with our previous remarks concerning the body as a jail and the mirror-play between the body and hell, it appears that the "divinity” of the soul does not consist simply in its capacity for survival; indeed, the idea of survival is on the way to being surpassed. The important thing now is to escape from the alternation of life and death, from reiteration; the “divine” soul is a soul that can be delivered from this reciprocal generation of contrary states, from the “wheel of birth and rebirth.” We are on the threshold of a new understanding of the self: the soul, having become the counterpole of the life-death pair, outlasts the time of repetition. It is true that before Plato, before the attempt in the Phaedo to link this perenniality of the soul with the non-temporality of the Forms, “immortality” is not yet “eternity”; it is only, so it seems, a force sufficient to keep the soul in existence through several bodies and several lives, as we see in Socrates’ discussion with Simmias and Gebes. Before philosophy there does not yet exist a carefully thought-out model for an existence that remains identical, the same as itself. But at least the myth, in imagining a cycle of life and death, suggests a sort of carrying forward of the Self beyond contradiction, a sort of Repose beyond discord. Philosophy would not have tried to conceive the soul’s identity with itself if the myth had not inspired it. AssociationValue: 0.5314609458082222


Seg: well as among the Jews. Hence, it is to an intentional analysis of the myth of the fault of the Titans that we must now proceed, in order to show in what sense it explicates and completes the myth of situation. Such an intentional analysis presupposes that we take the myth in its final state (hence, in its late manifestation), and that we relate it retrospectively to the exegesis of the human condition that we have already reconstructed, without the aid of that myth, on the sole basis of the testimony of classic authors. AssociationValue: 0.6648762960651975


Seg: Sky. The myth attributed to the Orphics sketches, through similar images, a significant movement oriented from the one toward the many, from the confused toward the distinct—the same movement found in the Pre-Socratic cosmogonies. This kinship between the still mythical cosmogony of the Orphics and a more philosophical cosmogony can be explained in various ways: the philosophical cosmogonies may have been influenced by the Orphic myth, or more probably the theogonic myth, on contact with philosophy, may have turned in the direction of a genesis of being, while remaining a prisoner of the mythical imagination. AssociationValue: 0.6654495837954522


Seg: It is in the dominant figure of Phanes—“the most beautiful among the immortal gods’5—that the “philosophical tone of the Orphic myth is manifested. He is Protogonos, the first-born— Erikepaios, and so bisexual—Metis, counsel—Dionysos, Eros. Born of the primordial egg, representing the undifferentiated, he is both the difference among beings and the manifestation, the shining forth, of the totality of the world. He is truly “the unity of the whole and the separation of the parts. AssociationValue: 0.3941445962774555


Seg: evil, but rather of progressive separation, of gradual differentiation, as one sees in the myth of the primordial Egg. This myth, in abandoning the contradiction and replacing it by a movement from the Confused to the Differentiated, ceases to account for the unhappiness of man, which consists, on the contrary, in the confusion of his twofold original nature. Consequently a myth of differentiation no longer suffices to explain the evil in man, which is a mixture; and it is not astonishing that the source of evil is dislodged from the sphere of the divine, which is in the process of concentrating itself in the figure of Phanes, and that theogony appeals to an anthropogony to explain an evil, the secret of which it no longer possesses, Thus the Orphic experience of an occult soul imprisoned in a body that is its enemy burst the bonds of the theogonic drama, which was itself in the process of orientation towards a rational cosmology, A new etiological myth was needed. AssociationValue: 0.8789025359937316


Seg: In the first place, it is significant that the origin of evil was related to the “passion” of the youngest of the gods, Dionysos. The new myth, then, comes about from a strictly “theological” elaboration of the figure of Dionysos. Now, the infant god who is at the center of the original fault is not the Dionysos who inspires the pavta of the bacchantes, the rhythmic frenzy, their joi de vivre; he is a master of life, the young god who comes after Zeus. First, then, the madness of which Euripides’ Bacchantes gives us a picture (itself no doubt mythical, but significant) had to be replaced by meditation, delirium had to become speculation. That the Orphics did thus turn Dionysianism against, itself is very probable; that they oriented it toward a sort of pre-philosophy, AssociationValue: 0.4519943573822191


Seg: The second point to be considered is the role of the Titans in! the new myth, On the one hand they are associated with the pas-! sion of Dionysos as the “authors” of his murder; on the other hand AssociationValue: 0.4492605459059181


Seg: they are incorporated in the genesis of mankind through their punishment and their “ashes ” It is this progression in the myth that the literary expression permits us to follow from century to century. If the passion of Dionysos at the hands of the Titans is attested by several authors between the third century before our era and the first century of our era/ no text before Plutarch puts the crime of the Titans into relation with the birth of mankind. After having told how the Titans were struck by lightning as a punishment for the murder of Dionysos, Plutarch gives the following explanation: “This myth makes allusion to palingenesis. In fact, that part of us which is not amenable to reason or order, which is violent, not divine but demoniac, was called by the ancients Titans, and it is that part which is chastised and must pay the penalty” (De Esu Carnium, I, 996; Kern, O. F., 231). Now it was Plutarch also who assimilated the Dionysos-Zagreus myth to the myth of Osiris; it is tempting to suppose, with Festugiere, that he was the author of the Titanic origin of man as well. The Christian writers—Justin, Clement of Alexandria, Amobius—who worry about the persistence of the ancient beliefs say nothing about  <108> AssociationValue: 0.9888869295166868


Seg: this Titanic origin of man (it is true that they do not say anything; about Dionysos’ return to life either); and sometimes they pass over, in silence, the sinister repast, although it is essential to the anthropogonic myth. Thus we arrive at Proclus’ (fifth century; Kern, O. F,, 210) and Olympiodorus (sixth century; O. F., 209, 211-12, 220 f.) versions of the birth of mankind from the ashes., of the Titans; it is here that the myth gets its final form: man is; the inheritor both of the violent nature of the Titans, murderers of: Dionysos, and of the nature of Dionysos, with which the Titans; identified themselves by their horrible feast. Thus the myth is com-/ pleted at the moment when the cycle of the Neo-Platonic philoso-, phy reaches its end. AssociationValue: 0.9816296676935414


Seg: If we follow the progress of the myth through the successive quotations, we get the impression of a growth by addition of parts. The question now is whether this inflation of the Orphic myth at the beginning of our era also gave increasing explicitness to the myth of situation which we have elaborated without recourse to that anthropogony. AssociationValue: 0.9590851375583261


Seg: The myth of situation, as we have seen, tends to elevate the soul and to brand the body with a mark of infamy; it sets up the soul as the Same, and the body as the Other; the myth of situation is the imaginative expression of the dualism of soul and body, or rather the construction of that dualism in imagination. The question, then, that is raised by the myth is this: Why is that duality forgotten? Why is that twofold nature experienced as a confused existence? It was at this point that the myth in which the duality of the roots of existence was elaborated called for a myth which would recount the beginning of the confusion that makes necessary a constant effort to regain the vision of duality. It cannot be proved that this myth of origin was formulated explicitly in the archaic era, although Plato’s allusion to “the Titanic nature” {Laws, 701c) is troublesome; but it can be shown, by an analysis of meanings, that the myth of origin completes the sense of the myth of situation, AssociationValue: 0.7428785291684998


Seg: Contrary to this fragment of a Pythagorean Upo? Aoyos concerning a “freely chosen evil,” does not the myth of the Titans entirely remove the blame for evil from man by referring the origin of evil to superhuman events and beings? AssociationValue: 0.5096572010556102


Seg: It may be remarked that the Biblical myth also distributes the origin of evil between a human figure—Adam—and a non-human figure—the serpent,—thus separating the willed from the suffered. The myth of the Titan, instead of dividing choice and fate between man and demon, concentrates them in a single, ambiguous figure on the border between the divine and the human. The Titan is not truly other than man: we.are bom from his ashes; he is the inherited and contracted part of evil choice, that which Plato calls our Titanic nature; he attests that the lowest degree of freedom is close to the brute, angry, inordinate force of the unleashed elements; Prometheus is in harmony only with the shapeless scenery of the Caucasus, not with the temperate landscape of Colonus, which bathes the aged, transfigured Oedipus in sweetness. This savage possibility in ourselves, beginning from which our freedom becomes humanized, is relegated by the myth to the origin and incarnated in a crime older than any human fault; and so the Titan represents the anteriority of evil in relation to actual human evil. There is no occasion for opposing it to those evils, evoked AssociationValue: 0.6606965621001499


Seg: by the Pythagorean Upos Aoyos, which are avBalptra—“willed by ourselves,” “freely chosen”; the Orphic myth projects the temporal transcendence of evil into a mythical time; it gives a figurative expression to this experience: evil does not begin because it is always already there in some fashion; it is choice and heritage. AssociationValue: 0.5883853805133265


Seg: The Platonic myth in Book X of the Republic will give expression to the same fateful character attached to evil choice; it, too, will project this background implied in every actual choice into a choice that has already taken place, once upon a time, elsewhere. AssociationValue: 0.9549931396153041


Seg: Even if the Orphic anthropogony is a late elaboration, even if it is only a philosophizing allegory invented after the beginning of our era, it reveals the profound intention of the myth of situation which undoubtedly existed, in Orphism and outside Orphism, much earlier than Plato. The anthropogonic myth exhibits, on the level of theogonic images, the complete unfolding of the myth of situation by means of which the Orphics invented the “soul” and the “body.” AssociationValue: 0.7652356163928532


Seg: If now, turning toward the future, toward deliverance, we ask what type of “salvation” goes with this type of “evil,” one answer forces itself upon us: while the not-to-be-avowed theology of the wicked god excludes philosophy and finds fulfillment in the spectacle, the myth of the exiled soul Is par excellence the principle and promise of “knowledge,” of “gnosis.” The Orphics, says Plato, “named” the body; in naming the body, they named the soul. Now the act in which man perceives himself as soul, or, better, makes himself the same as his soul and other than his body—other' than the alternation of life and death,'—this purifying act par excellence is knowledge. In this awareness, in this awakening to itself of the exiled soul, all “philosophy” of the Platonic and Neo-Platonic type is contained. If the body is desire and passion, the soul is the origin and principle of any withdrawal, of any attempt to put a distance between the Aoyos on the one hand and the body and its waBo% on the other; and all knowledge of anything, every sci- AssociationValue: 0.6141448596085449


Seg: Of course the Orphic movement itself seems not to have been capable of going explicitly beyond “myth” to “philosophy”; even on the level of the Upb? Aoyos the Orphic reform, as we have seen, does indeed bear on “meanings,” as Guthrie says, but it remains a prisoner of cosmogonic imagery. But Orphism is not only a jffios Aoyos ; it is also a /?ios, a “way of life.” This “way of life” is to the future what the myth is to the past; as the myth is the recollection of a human evil that is older than man, so the Orphic Upos is the prophecy of a deliverance that is more human than man. And just as the myth wavers between theogonic imagination and philosophical reflection, so the Orphic filo? hesitates between the old ritual purification and a new sort of purification in spirit and in truth. On the one hand, it looks to the teletai preached by so many other professional purifiers, so many other mendicant soothsayers and prophets of the sort judged so severely by Plato in Book II of the Republic: AssociationValue: 0.4302371549296814


Seg: It is the Pythagorean literature that marks, decisively and explicitly, the passage from “purification” as rite and “purification” as “philosophy.” <112> The “sacred discourse” of Pythagoreanism—as it can be reconstructed, or simply conjectured, on the basis of the testimony of the fourth and third centuries alone, without recourse to the Neo-Pythagorean apocrypha of about the beginning of our era, and still less to the even later “Golden Verses”—was preeminently a discourse of this sort, hesitating between myth and philosophy. That literature, situated at the crossroads of science and revelation—the division between “Mathematicians” and “Acousmatics” is very significant in that respect,—is connected on the one hand with the pessimistic myth of the fall and, on the other hand, points toward purification by knowledge. It is an echo of Orphism that we hear in the fragment of Chrysippus, which refers expressly to a Pythagorean maxim: yvwtrci fravOpwrovs avOaipera irripar Ixowas. <113> It is Orphism that the Pythagoreans extend in the direction of Platonism when they proclaim that unity of the race of men and of gods which Pindar also sings: “One is the race of men, one the race of the gods” (frag. 131, Nem., 6, 1). “To follow the god,” to walk in the “traces of the di- AssociationValue: 0.3685179620133205


Seg: But these fragments not only testify to the carrying out of the Orphico-Pythagorean tradition in the mingled light and shade of the philosophizing myth (or mythicizing philosophy);. they herald something else. We cannot forget that the author of the Purifications is the author of a poem On Nature. For the first time, perhaps, the same principle—Discord, vcTkos—is invoked both as a cosmological principle, coupled with Friendship, and as the root of human evils; the souls of mortals are long-lived gods who have “erred, soiling their hands with murder,” and who, “having vio- AssociationValue: 0.45490574210454376


Seg: lated their oath,” have "followed in the steps of Discord.” Friendship and Discord emerge from the myth and are elevated to the rank of Principles: "Good and Evil as principles,” says Aristotle. <114> With Empedocles’ Discord, a principle of things which is manifested in human evil, we are on the threshold of a new peripeteia; the "myth” rises to "speculation.” We shall not now cross this threshold of the symbolic knowledge of Evil. AssociationValue: 0.9749971006721906


Seg: at the end of these hermeneutic exercises, there is a question that must be troubling the reader as it has embarrassed the author. Gan we live in all those mythical universes at the same time? Shall we, then, we children of criticism, we men with immense memories, be the Don Juans of the myth? Shall we court them all in turn? AssociationValue: 0.41367777434042935


Seg: The presupposition of my undertaking is that the place where one can best listen to, hear, and understand what all the myths together have to teach us is the place where the pre-eminence of one of those myths is proclaimed still today—namely, the Adamic myth. For that presupposition I must “give reasons,” as Plato says in speaking of the initiates of the Orphico-Pythagorean tradition, and as St, Paul says in addressing the Christians of the Apostolic age. AssociationValue: 0.5564984875737581


Seg: 1.	In the first place, the faith of the Christian believer is not concerned primarily with an interpretation of evil, its nature, its origin, and its end; the Christian does not say: I believe in sin, but: I believe in the remission of sins; sin gets its full meaning only retrospectively, from the present instant of “justification,” in the language of St. Paul; on this point we have insisted sufficiently at the end of our study of the trilogy defilement-sin-guilt. It follows that the description of sin and the symbolization of its origin by means of the myth belong to the faith only secondarily and derivatively, as the best counterpart of a gospel of deliverance and hope. It is not without reason that we repeat this, in opposition to the tendency, issuing from Augustinianism, to confer upon the "dogma of original sin” the same sort of authority as upon justification by faith in the death and resurrection of Christ; like the church of the first centuries, we regard the interpretation of sin as a part of the “prolegomena of the faith,” rather than as a part of the "deposit of the faith.” All our effort to relate the dogma of original sin to the Adamic myth, and the latter to the penitential experience of Israel and of the Apostolic church, points in the same direction; in making apparent the intentional relation of the dogma to the myth and of the myth to the confession of sins, we have confirmed the subordination of the dogma of original sin to the preaching of salvation. The bond that unites the Adamic myth to the “Christo-logical” nucleus of the faith is a bond of suitability; the symbolic description of man, in the doctrine of sin, suits the announcement of salvation, in the doctrine of justification and regeneration. To understand that bond of suitability is already to give a reason for the belief accorded to the Biblical symbolization of human evil. AssociationValue: 0.9929673968507892


Seg: 2.	That doctrine of sin, even when considered abstractly, detached from its soteriological context, is not an incomprehensible revelation; besides its relation of suitability to Christology, it is revealed insofar as it is revealing. In fact, here again we find our interpretation of the myth as a symbol of the second degree. It is far from being the case that the Christian believer is obliged to limit himself to the alternative, either myth or revelation; rather, he should resolutely seek the meaning revealed in the story of the fall on the basis of its interpretation as myth, in the twofold sense of an etiological fable demythologized by history and a revealing symbol liberated by the very process of demythologization. Is not the revelation of this myth, then, precisely its power to challenge? St. Paul spoke of the “inner witness of the Holy Spirit.” What can that witness signify, in the particular case of the understanding of evil, its nature, and its origin, if not the “discerning of spirits”? And is that, in its turn,. anything other than the election of the best myth, the recognition of the most significant, the most revealing myth, and, at the same time, the myth that can most appropriately be co-ordinated with the advent of salvation, serving as a prolegomenon to the faith? If it is in this sense that we must seek for some quality of revelation in the Biblical story of the fall, that quality is not irrational; it calls for verification of its revealed origin by its revealing power. The Holy Spirit is not an arbitrary and absurd commandment, it is discernment; as it addresses itself to my intelligence, it invites me, in my turn, to practice the crisis, the discernment of myths; and this is already a way of practicing the crede ut intelligas which we shall evoke in the following chap- ■ ter. This discernment calls for a hermeneutics capable of bringing out the symbolic meaning of the myth. As we shall show in the methodological chapter that terminates this investigation of the myths of evil, the hermeneutics, in its turn, requires that the philosopher wager his belief, and that he lose or win the wager by putting the revealing power of the symbol to the test of selfunderstanding. In understanding himself better, the philosopher verifies, up.to a certain point, the wager of his faith. All the rest of this work will be devoted to the verification of the wager through integral experience; thus the revealing power of the myth will be manifested. This is the second way in which the believer justifies his belief in the revealed character of the myth to which he ascribes pre-eminence. AssociationValue: 0.9949430434045952


Seg: 3.	The pre-eminence of the Adamic myth does not imply that the other myths are purely and simply abolished; rather, life, or new life, is given to them by the privileged myth. The appropriation of the Adamic myth involves the appropriation, one after the other, of the other myths, which begin to speak to us from the place from which the dominant myth addresses us. Not that the other myths are “true” in the same sense as the Adamic myth: we have seen that the Adamic myth is opposed to all the others in various ways, as they are opposed to one another; but the Adamic myth, by its complexity and its inner tensions, reaffirms in varying degrees the essential truths of the other myths. Thereby one catches sight of a specific manner of justifying the Adamic myth, which consists in displaying the relations of opposition and identification that attach the other myths to the Adamic myth. By thus putting all the other myths into perspective with relation to a dominant myth, we bring to light a circularity among the myths and we make possible the substitution of a dynamics for a statics of the myths; in place of a static view of myths regarded as having equal rights, the dynamic view makes manifest the struggle among the myths. The appropriation of the struggle among the myths is itself a struggle for appropriation. AssociationValue: 0.9910880333463588


Seg: This chapter is devoted to the dynamics of the myths. Of the three ways of accounting for the pre-eminence of the Adamic myth, this is the one that most naturally follows our mythical investigation of fault. The second way will be the object of the last volume of this work; it corresponds to the line of force of our whole undertaking and commands a philosophy of fault, distinct from a theology; the principle of it will be set forth in the concluding chapter of the present work. The dynamics of the myths which we are going to propose plays a propaedeutic role with relation to that philosophical interpretation of the symbols of evil; for it is not the Adamic myth alone, but the whole cycle of myths and its gravita- , tion around the dominant myth, that provide the subject matter for reflection on the symbols of evil. As to. the first way of justifying the Adamic myth, it - belongs to theology and not to philosophy. The philosopher verifies what is revealed by that which reveals; the AssociationValue: 0.9871413966671782


Seg: theologian testifies to the agreement of the Adamic myth with Christology. Like St. Paul, he places the “in Adam” with relation to the “in Christ,” and determines the relevance of the symbol of the fall to the totality of the Kerygma; that relevance constitutes its authority in an ecclesiastical theology. The philosopher who does not pretend to annex Christology to his enterprise can have recourse only to the verification of the revealing character of the myth. The belief accorded to the pre-eminence of the Adamic myth is common to the way of the philosopher and the way of the theologian, but their modes of justifying the belief are different. We shall be concerned with the bifurcation between philosophy and theology only in the analyses of the final chapter, The dynamics of the myths, which we are about to sketch, still belongs to an undifferentiated mode of thinking that is common to the theologian AssociationValue: 0.6953310531661323


Seg: The cycle of the myths can be compared to a gravitational space, in which masses attract and repel each other at various distances. Seen from the point of view of the Adamic myth, the oriented space of the myths presents a concentric structure, which puts the tragic myth nearest to the Adamic myth and the myth of the exiled soul farthest from it. Every time that we have anticipated the dynamics in the statics, we have affirmed the proximity of the tragic myth and, indeed, of the theogonic myth to the Adamic myth, and the isolation of the Orphic myth, which alone divides man, separates the soul, and invites us to flee from here to the beyond. We must now elaborate those scattered remarks systematically, following the order of increasing opposition. By means of and beyond that increasing opposition, the essential truths of the other myths will be reaffirmed with decreasing force. AssociationValue: 0.9867622457489822


Seg: The Adamic myth is anti-tragic; that is dear. The fated aberration of man, the indivisibility of the guilt of the hero and the guilt of the wicked god are no longer thinkable after the twofold confession, in the Augustinian sense of the word confession, of the holiness of God and the sin of man. And yet the Adamic myth does reaffirm something of the tragic man and even something of the tragic god. AssociationValue: 0.41374291832778076


Seg: There are several "tragic” aspects of the Adamic myth. We have already hinted at the “tragic” meaning of the figure of the serpent, which is already there and already evil. But before coming back to the serpent, we must note the tragic accent of the Adamic figure itself. That figure thematizes a mystery of iniquity which is not reducible to the clear consciousness of actual evil, of the evil beginning in the instant; it points towards an underlying peccability which, as Kierkegaard says in The Concept of Dreadj endures and increases quantitatively. That underlying peccability is like the horizon of actual evil, and is perceived only as horizon, at the frontier of the avowal of present evil. Later speculation will endeavor to fix that underlying peccability in the false concept of inheritance. The rationalization of original sin as inherited sin was to encumber Western thought for centuries. It is necessary to undo this knot of speculation and to display the motivations deposited as a sediment in the pseudo-thought of an original sin which was supposed to be both a first sin and a transmitted heritage; it is necessary to come back to the limiting concept of an evil concerning which I confess that it is already there in the very instant in which I avow that I put it there. This other side, not posited, of an evil that is posited, is the “radical” in radical evil; but I know it only as implied. AssociationValue: 0.4394166545897734


Seg: The other myths speak of the anteriority (theogonic myth) of this reverse side of sin, the sin committed by all men in Adam, or of its passiveness and externality (Oiphic myth), or, finally, of its fatedness, which is the contribution of the tragic myth, By means of an unavowable theology, aspects of the Ineluctable are made manifest which are not opposed to freedom, but are implied by it, and which cannot be made the objects of biological, psychological, or sociological knowledge, but are accessible only to symbolic and AssociationValue: 0.309345135448186


Seg: In the first place, the tragic myth saves the Biblical myth only 6 Max Scheler, Le phinomhne du Tragtque. AssociationValue: 0.7840790982522903


Seg: The myth of the exiled soul, we have said, is separated from the others by a significant typological distance. Shall we say that it is accessible only to a re-enactment in sympathetic imagination and that it cannot be related to the Adamic myth except as an opposed myth?	, AssociationValue: 0.952624993987474


Seg: The simple fact that the history of the use in Christianity of a Neo-Platonic mode of expression offers so many examples of contamination of the myth of the fall by the myth of the exiled soul lends itself to reflection. One may try to get rid of these mixed forms by denouncing them as simple misunderstandings. It may even be an important undertaking for the pliilosopher and the theologian to cut the knot of confusion forcibly. This contamination is responsible for the shift in Christianity to what Nietzsche called Platonism for the people; because of it, Christianity has seemed like the most considerable invention of afterworlds in history. We ourselves have already vigorously contrasted the dualism of soul and body, which makes evil a mixture, with the anthropological monism of the Adamic myth, to which corresponds the conception of evil as a deviation from a primordial state. The place of the Orphic myth, on the extreme periphery of the system gravitating around the Adamic myth, expresses, on the plane of dynamics, what the statics of the myths has already made apparent, AssociationValue: 0.9881550179065763


Seg: There still remains, however, the task of understanding the motivations that have governed the process of contamination. Now, it is only by- discovering in each of these myths an affinity for the other that we shall be able to account for the possibility of their confusion; and in thus making the contamination intelligible through a play of underground affinities, we shall have stretched to the limit our endeavor to comprehend all the myths, including the most contrary ones, in the light of the dominant myth, AssociationValue: 0.7346887010102565


Seg: Our starting-point must once again be the experience of evil as already there—that is to say, the other side of the Adamic myth, the side represented by Eve and the Serpent. But, while the tragic myth interprets passivity and seduction in terms of divine blinding and the theogonic myth interprets them in terms of a resurgence of primordial chaos, the Orphic myth develops the aspect of the apparent externality of the seduction and tries to make it coincide with the “body,” understood as the unique root of all that is involuntary, AssociationValue: 0.38684053080312053


Seg: that he was kept from falling into gnosticism, first, by his acute sense of the incarnation of Christ in a flesh like ours; second, by his expectation of a redemption of our bodies; and finally, by the Adamic myth. This I^st point merits further attention; for, while it may have been disturbing to see St. Paul contributing to the Adamic mythology and congealing the Adamic symbol in literalism by regarding Adam as an individual situated at the beginning of history, it must now be granted that it is that mythology which keeps St. Paul from turning to dualism. The same pages that make the individual Adam the counterpart of Christ, called the second Adam (“as by one man . . ”), have a new ring when they are compared with the quasi-dualistic texts; they re-introduce contingency where there was a temptation to see a law of nature. The “one man” represents the divergence between the good creation and the actual state of man, which St. Paul calls elsewhere “the flesh,” “the old man,” “the world.” Thus it is the Adamic mythology that strikes a counterblow in opposition to the drift towards gnosis. AssociationValue: 0.5569786238984852


Seg: The distance between the Adamic myth and the myth of the exiled soul, which is still very perceptible in . St. Paul, will become smaller when, on the one hand, the peculiar traits of the Adamic myth become attenuated and, on the other hand, new traits of Christian experience make the myth of the exiled soul more seductive. On the one hand, Adam will be less and less the symbol of the humanity of man; his innocence will become a fantastic innocence, accompanied by knowledge, bliss, and immortality, whether by nature or as superadded gift; at the same time, his fault, instead of being a case of “going astray,” will become truly a “fall,” an existential downgrading, a descent from the height of a superior and actually superhuman status; consequently, Adam’s fall will no longer be very different from the fall of the souls in AssociationValue: 0.6334988956398309


Seg: Plato’s PhaedruSj where the soul, already incarnate, falls into an earthly body. Except for the image, the fall will tend to become confused with the exile of the soul far from its previous homeland. At the same time as the Adamic myth is being altered, Christian experience will be transformed and, in order to account for its new qualities, it will, so to speak, breathe the air of the dualistic myth. In its ascetic form as well as in its mystical form, Platonizing Christianity adopts the opposition between contemplation and concupiscence, which, in its turn, introduces the opposition between the spiritual soul and the mortal and raving body; the old fear of defilement and the old fear of the body and sexuality are taken over by the new wisdom. Thus everything that leads the Christian experience of sin from pride towards concupiscence, also leads it towards the dualistic myths. It might be said that Christianity will tend towards the identification of evil and the body (without, it is true, ever reaching that limit), for the same reasons which impelled it to adopt, the Greek theme of the immortality of the soul. Among the motives for that transformation we ought, no doubt, to give a special place to the experience of death, or rather, of dying; with martyrdom, the experience of dying will reach a point of virulence and authenticity which has marked all later spirituality. Now martyrdom, accepted with joy and sometimes desired, inclines a man to regard death as the beginning of true life, the life with Christ; by contrast, the sojourn in this “valley of tears” seems to be no more than a time of trial and a figure of evil. The purest desire is to flee from here to the beyond, as it was for the Socrates of the Gorgias. Thus there will be assembled, within the Christian experience, the conditions for a fusion with Neo-Platonic spirituality, the remote heir of the myth of the exiled soul and the body-prison. We shall return later to this three-termed dialectic of Christianity, Neo-Platonism, and gnosis, which we are not yet equipped to understand rightly, because we have not yet brought to light all the factors involved. Moreover, it belongs to the plane of much more speculative symbols, such as “matter,” “original sin,” “fall of the eons.” All of our analysis moves on a lower level. It is enough to have sketched, on the level of mythical symbols, the lines 10 See Gargam, Vamour et la mort (Paris, 1959), pp. 281 ff. AssociationValue: 0.848868176928833


Seg: of motivation which, beginning from the internal tensions of the Adamic myth, incline it toward the myth of the exiled soul and make possible their reciprocal influence on one another, AssociationValue: 0.8621115906372233


Seg: But this trend from the Adamic scheme toward the theme of the exiled soul would not have been possible if the latter, on its side, had not revealed an extraordinary potency for symbolic transposition. Several times we have alluded to the symbolic richness of the oldest of the symbols of evil, the symbol of defilement. Defilement is always more than a stain, and so it can signify analogically all the degrees of the experience of evil, even to the most elaborate concept of the servile will. Now the over-determination of the symbol of the body is not less than that of the symbol of defilement, for the two processes are inseparable. One can understand why, If the essence of the symbol of defilement is constituted by the themes of positiveness, externality, and non-destructive alteration, the body, in its turn, can serve as a symbol for the symbol; it, too, is brought into existence, it is on the border between the inner and the outer, it is essentially a producer of effects. That is why “explanation” of evil by the body always presupposes a degree of symbolic transposition of the body. Without this, the body would be simply an alibi for guilt, as it is when someone invokes character or heredity to excuse himself. The explanation of evil by the body is not an objective explanation, but an etiological myth; that is to say, it is ultimately a symbol of the second degree. But if that explanation aims at becoming scientific, as in modem times, then the ethical character of evil action disappears; man cannot impute evil to himself and at the same time refer it to the body, without treating the body as a symbol of certain aspects of the experience of the evil that he confesses. The symbolic transmutation of the body is a necessary condition for its belonging to the mythics of evil. AssociationValue: 0.5692043217326253


Seg: It would be inexact to see in Plato only the accusation against the body—“that evil thing with which our soul is mixed/ says the Phaedo—and not to recognize the movement of review, rectification, and internalization of the previous symbolism of the body-prison. At the same time as he projects the Socratic analysis of the unjust soul into the body, he transmutes the body itself into a symbol of the passivity of the soul. On the one hand, the idea, which seems to be purely Socratic, of “tending” the soul, or “taking care’ of the soul, calls for the symbolism of the body; “care” of the soul presupposes, in fact, that the soul is like a body threatened by disease, which must be cared for and saved; and so ethics and politics are comparable to a “medicine” of the soul (Protagoras, 31 lb— 313a, 356c-357a). To this medical symbol of “care of the soul corresponds the symbol of the “disease of injustice” (to vomjfm tt}<s dSixtas, Gorgias, 480b), and of the other discordances in the soul, conceived on the model of derangements of the humors of the body, The same symbolism governs the idea of expiation; it “relieves” the soul of its wickedness, as purgation “relieves” the body of its evil humors. That is why the soul that has been punished—purged of its ills by punishment—is happier than the unjust soul that has not made atonement; this function of punishment supposes that injustice is like a disease and that justice, which administers punishment, is like the art of healing. Hence, before the body is the “cause” of injustice, its own ills are the symbol of injustice. It was this medical metaphor of disease and cure, directly applied to the ills and the care of the soul, which made possible, in the other direction, the philosophical transposition of the Orphic myth of the body-prison and its transmutation into a cipher of the unjust soul. The Socratic soul was ready for Plato’s resumption of the Orphic myths. That resumption marks both a re-immei’-sion of philosophy in myth and an advance toward a symbolism of a higher degree, in which the literal meaning of the bodily symbol is increasingly muted. AssociationValue: 0.6427870269597443


Seg: We are far from the myth of the evil body. Or, rather, the ethical exegesis of the myth brings out the over-determination of the expression “soma” in the myth; this mythical “soma” is already more than body. Of course, the notion of reincarnation attracts it toward a purely imaginative mode of representation, according to which existence is a literal captivity in a series of corporeal AssociationValue: 0.9689575684765653


Seg: coverings which are put on and taken off like a garment; but the practice of purification already begins to attract the myth of the “body” in the direction of meanings that are symbolic, rather than literal. AssociationValue: 0.7609504702975631


Seg: <116> The eschatological myth which separates the second and the third parts of the Phaedo itself bears the mark of this advance in reflection. The unjust soul, arrived in the underworld, bears .the trace of its injustice, as blows that it has inflicted upon itself; it is by these traces in the naked soul that the judge recognizes the affinity of the soul for its bodyfri <rw^aroet5^ 81c). This affinity is represented jn the myth by the wandering of the dead man, haunted by the desire for a new body appropriated to its care. The trace of the old body is like the habitus of the soul, its customary manner of being “chained and glued” (82c), "nailed” (83d) to its body. AssociationValue: 0.5431329056561359


Seg: This text is of great importance if one considers that Platonism is throughout a justification of language, laying the foundations of language first in the reality of meaning, then in the dialectical structure of meaning. If, then, man is essentially speech, the “passions” of speech are cardinal passions. Parmenides had already noted the bond connecting opinion, error, and confusion in naming, Now the “passions” of speech are not passive passions, so to speak. As political life shows, falsifications of language are active counterfeitings of true speech; they constitute a world of para—a paralogy—a world centered on the category of the Pseudo; they are “imitations” of discussion, of the restraint imposed by truth, and of the agreement of interlocutors in the same logos. We see how this theme of “falsehood” reacts on the theme of “desire,” which seemed to throw the blame for evil on the body. Desire is evil only because it is no longer strictly corporeal; it must be seized by a frenzy of immoderation; and immoderation comes to desire only through “falsehood.” The tyrant is the living proof of the madness that takes possession of desire. The tyrant, indeed, is for philosophy a magnitude that is more than political and is, properly speaking, metaphysical, because he is the symbol of the man who has the power to satisfy all his desires; he is the myth of unlimited desire—unlimited because it is ministered to by a power that is itself not limited by law. Now the tyrant gives evidence that this body of desire undergoes a sort of mutation from the fact of the unjust soul which inhabits it, that desire is a creation of injustice and not vice versa. AssociationValue: 0.37459407213203233


Seg: We have now made the opposite journey of the one that led us from the Socratic idea of the unjust soul to the idea of an evil influence of the body, taken over from the myths of defilement. The dizziness that seemed to mount from the body toward the soul, in a first philosophical approximation that was still close to the language of myth, is really an evil of injustice, an evil of false discourse, which paralyzes the soul and delivers it up to the sorcery of its suffering. The body, then, is no longer the origin of evil, but only the "place” of the soul’s captivity, while desire is "temptation,” and injustice is the origin of the evil by which the soul makes itself like its body. Injustice begets the dizziness that disrupts the original community of the soul with truth, and produces the deceptive likeness of the soul to its body. AssociationValue: 0.985711218203319


Seg: Is it possible to interpret the myth of the fall in the Phaedrus similarly? I think so. The opposition between the Biblical fall, construed as a deviation of the will, and the Platonic fall, construed as a-fall into the body, should not be pushed too far. Otherwise, besides remaining a prisoner of the most literal interpretation of "body”—an interpretation encouraged, it is true, by those Platonic “revivals” which are closest to the myth,—one does not take account of the structure of the myth itself. We have had occasion to begin this exegesis in our phenomenology of fallibility and to note that the myth is a myth of "composition” before being a myth of a "fall.” By the same token, evil is not exactly outside, in an alien and seductive body, but inside, in a discordance of self with self, the decisive philosophical interpretation of which belongs to the ethical order. The soul is composite and incarnate before the fall; that statement is so true that the proof of immortality in the Phdedrus rests on the hypothesis of a soul that moves itself in moy-ing a body under its control. The combination of a “self-mover’ and a “moved” is, then, prior to evil (245c~246a); it characterizes all the members of the great heavenly procession—gods, stars, and human souls: “How does it happen that mortal and immortal merit the name of living being? Let us try to explain this. Soul in all its species has charge of all that is soulless” (246b). Thus a god is “an immortal living being, possessing a soul and a body which are by nature united forever” (246d), As to the world-soul, that “perfect and ever-winged soul administers the whole cosmos” (246c). The Timaeus says the same thing (34c-36d): the whole of the corporeal is in the soul, not the soul in it (36d-e). AssociationValue: 0.5056184805702086


Seg: Thus the fall seems to be, by turns, a consequence of this primordial discord or a new cropping-up of the evil of injustice. As in Kierkegaard’s Concept of Dread, the “passage” from “composition” to “fall”—I would say: from fallibility to fault—is by turns, or even at the same time, a subsequent misfortune or an unforeseeable “leap.” But the Biblical myth of the fall also combined the continuous progression from temptation to fault and the discontinuous outburst of the act itself. If the fall were only the inevitable effect of a graceless constitution, evil would be entirely reducible to the original indigence which, according to the Symposium, attended the birth of Eros; it would be the Other of the Word which the last dialogues evoke. Neo-Platonism understood it thus, without, however, being able to eliminate the inner defection of the soul, which surrenders itself to that Other. But then “conversion” would be incomprehensible, if it did not come from the same source as corruption, as Kant rightly saw. AssociationValue: 0.9863612921718787


Seg: Everything leads to the conclusion that the philosophical point of the myth is the suggestion that the “earthy” signifies the captivity imposed on the soul by itself, the “world” in St. John’s sense, the “flesh” (and the “body”) in St, Paul’s sense. In short, it is “injustice” which predominates in the philosophical exegesis of the earthy, just as it is the earthy “body” that mythically symbolizes injustice. AssociationValue: 0.7923821888234855


Seg: We have developed to considerable length the Platonic transposition of the Orphic myth. For the reader instructed by the prophets of Israel and the Christian Kerygma, it represents an inflection of the symbolism of the “evil body” in the direction of the theme of “evil choice,” and at the same time it helps to make intelligible the contamination by each other of the two mythical cycles, that which gravitates around the primordial “Anthropos” and that which begins with the mythology of the “body-prison.” If we admit that, in St. Paul and St. John, the “flesh” is more than the physical body and the “world” more than the universe of things, it is fair to read Plato with the same understanding for the symbolism and the same irony, Consequently, the difference between the “flesh” according to St. Paul and the “body” according to Plato tends to vanish. We do not say, however, that there is no difference; for just as St. Paul is preserved from the gnosis of the evil body by his Adamic mythology, Plato is separated from the Biblical conception of evil by his attachment to the Greek con-cepton of Desire, to AoyioTtKov and to tiri$vni)TiKov constitute the fundamental polarity of existence according to Book IV of the Republic; the Rational and the Desirous form a pair of contraries in which the second term tends to take up into itself everything that blocks and resists thought. That is why the “concupisci-ble” in Plato cannot coincide exactly with the “flesh” according AssociationValue: 0.44575441044386327


Seg: 12 We have not carried this transposition beyond right opinion to the dialectical level, in order not to step out of the framework of hermeneutics that limits our present investigation. In Book III we shall return to the Platonic “metaphysics’ <117> and to the speculative ciphers it proposes: “necessity,” “errant cause,” the “inferior gods,” the “other soul,” the “unlimited,” the “other,” the “metempirical choice,” etc. We shall see that that metaphysics erects symbols of a higher degree upon the phenomenology of desire and injustice which has found its expression in a resumption of the Orphic myth. AssociationValue: 0.9795399970874507


Seg: Is this attempt to view all the myths in the perspective of a dominant myth entirely satisfactory? We do not pretend that it is. If it were, that would mean that the hermeneutics of myths can take the place of systematic philosophy, which is not the case. The universe of the myths remains a broken universe; not being able to unify the mythical universe on the basis of one of these myths alone, imaginative and sympathetic understanding, without personal appropriation, often remains as the thinker’s only resource. Besides, alternatives which cannot be settled by a simple passage from the statics to the dynamics of the myths subsist at the flection of each of the pairs that we have constructed in order to get the dynamics going. AssociationValue: 0.6396847529884564


Seg: Hence the contribution of Aristotle, who restated the pi’oblem of pleasure and directed ethical reflection on pleasure toward the activity of which pleasure is only the bloom or the premium, is so much the more valuable; we shall come back to it. But Stoicism, in spite of Epicurus, led ethical reflection back into the old groove of the Cynics. Thus there is a line of force in Greek thought which goes from the Socratics through Plato to the Stoics, according to which evil is the passivity of desire, rather than active evil will. That is why this type of thought has a natural affinity to the Orphic myth, rather than to the Adamic myth. Through the Orphic myth, it prolongs the symbolism of defilement and the tradition of mystico-ritual purifications, rather than the Biblical symbolism of sin. The whole series of treatises on the “passions of the soul” is contained in germ in this old pact between Greek philosophy of the Platon iz-ing type and the myth of the soul exiled in the prison of an evil body.  <118> AssociationValue: 0.47080280766030763


Seg: Is this attempt to view all the myths in the perspective of a dominant myth entirely satisfactory? We do not pretend that it is. If it were, that would mean that the hermeneutics of myths can take the place of systematic philosophy, which is not the case. The universe of the myths remains a broken universe; not being able to unify the mythical universe on the basis of one of these myths alone, imaginative and sympathetic understanding, without personal appropriation, often remains as the thinker’s only resource. Besides, alternatives which cannot be settled by a simple passage from the statics to the dynamics of the myths subsist at the flection of each of the pairs that we have constructed in order to get the dynamics going. AssociationValue: 0.6396847529884564


Seg: One thing that we have acquired, at the end of our exercise in hermeneutics, is a conviction that the three myths of chaos, of divine blinding, and of exile, reveal the hyper-ethical dimension of the myth of the fall and so indicate the limitations of any “philosophy of the will” which tries to remain an ethical vision of the world, The myth of the fall needs. those other myths, so that the ethical God it presupposes may continue to be a Deus Absconditas and so that the guilty man it denounces may also appear as the victim of a mystery of iniquity which makes him deserving of Pity as well as of Wrath. AssociationValue: 0.30735217845977514


Seg: The hiatus between pure reflection on “fallibility” and the confession of “sins” is patent. Pure reflection makes no appeal to any myth or symbol; in this sense it is a direct exercise of rationality. But comprehension of evil is a sealed book for it; the reflection is pure, but it leaves everyday reality outside, insofar as man’s everyday reality is “enslavement to the passions.” On the other hand, the enigma of servile freedom is avowed by the religious consciousness, but at the price of a methodological rupture in the continuity of reflection. Not only does the confession of sins appeal to a differ-  ent quality of experience, but it has recourse to a different language, which we have shown to be symbolic through and through. Is it possible, after this rupture, to come back to pure reflection and to enrich it with all that we have gained from the symbolic knowledge of evil? AssociationValue: 0.5150057918521859


Seg: The question is difficult, for we are required to advance between two hazards. On the one hand, it is not possible simply to juxtapose reflection and confession; it is not possible to interrupt philosophical discourse, as Plato does, by fanciful stories, and to say: here discourse ends, there myth begins. Lachelier is right: philosophy AssociationValue: 0.9666627986533811


Seg: The enterprise would be a hopeless one if symbols were radically alien to philosophical discourse. But symbols are already in the element of speech. We have said sufficiently that they rescue feeling and even fear from silence and confusion; they provide a language for avowal, for confession; in virtue of them, man remains language through and through. That is not the most important thing: there exists nowhere a symbolic language without hermeneutics; wherever a man dreams or raves, another man arises to give an interpretation; what was already discourse, even if incoherent, is brought into coherent discourse by hermeneutics. In this respect, the hermeneutics of modem men is continuous with the spontaneous interpretations that have never been lacking to symbols. On the other hand, what is peculiar to the modern hermeneutics is that it remains in the line of critical thought. But its critical function does not turn it away from its appropriative function; I should say, rather, that it makes it more authentic and more perfect. The dissolution of the myth as explanation is the necessary way to the restoration of the myth as symbol. Thus, the time of restoration is not a different time from that of criticism; we are in every way children of criticism, and we seek to go beyond criticism by means of criticism, by a criticism that is no longer reductive but restorative. That is the purpose which animated Schelling, Schleiermacher, Dilthey, and today, in various ways, Leenhardt, van der Leeuw, Bliade, Jung, Bultmann. Today we have a more acute awareness of the immensity of the wager of this hermeneutics. On the one hand, it represents the advanced point of criticism, as an awareness of the myth as myth. By that awareness it hastens the movement of demythologization, which is only the counterpart of an ever more rigorous decision about what is history according to the historical method; demythologization is the irreversible gain of truthfulness, intellectual honesty, objectivity. On the other hand, AssociationValue: 0.6084350795441552


Seg: Well, then, we have left the plane of truth without belief and come to the circle of hermeneutics, to the believing for the sake of understanding which is also understanding for the sake of believing. I entered that circle as soon as I admitted that I read the ensemble of the myths from a certain point of view, that the mythical space was for me an oriented space, and that my perspective angle was the pre-eminence of the Jewish confession of sins, its symbolism, and its mythology. By that adoption of one myth, the appropriation of all of them became possible, at least up to a certain point. AssociationValue: 0.8795288877015454


Seg: Then there opens before me the field of philosophical hermeneutics properly so called: no longer an allegorizing interpretation that pretends to find a disguised philosophy under the imaginative garments of the myth, but a philosophy that starts from the symbols and endeavors to promote the meaning, to form it, by a creative interpretation. I shall venture to call that endeavor, at least provisionally, a “transcendental deduction” of symbols. Transcendental deduction, in the Kantian sense, consists in justifying a concept by showing that it makes possible the construction of a domain of objectivity. Now, if I use the symbols of deviation, wandering, and captivity as a detector of reality, if I decipher man on the basis of the mythical symbols of chaos, mixture, and fall, in short, if I elaborate an empirics of the servile will under the guidance of a mythology of evil existence, then I can say that in return I have “deduced”—in the transcendental meaning of the word—the symbolism of human evil. In fact, the symbol, used as a means of detecting and deciphering human reality, will have been verified by its power to raise up, to illuminate, to give order to that region of human experience, that region of confession, which we were too ready to reduce to error, habit, emotion, passivity—in short, to one or another of the dimensions of finitude that have no need of the symbols of evil to open them up and discover them. But the expression, “transcendental deduction of symbols/’ is not absolutely satisfactory; it orients us toward the idea that the justification of the symbol by its power to reveal constitutes a simple augmentation of self-awareness> a simple extension of reflexive circumscription, whereas a philosophy instructed by the symbols has for its task a qualitative transformation of reflexive consciousness. Every symbol is finally a hierophany, a manifestation of the bond between man and the sacred. Now in treating the symbol as a simple re-vealer of self-awareness, we cut it off from its ontological function; we pretend to believe that “know thyself” is purely reflexive, whereas it is first of all an appeal by which each man is invited to situate himself better in being—in Greek terms, to “be wise.  As the Charmides of Plato says: “The God [at Delphi], by way of salutation, says to them, in reality: Be wise; but, as a soothsayer, he says it in enigmatic form. Be wise and Know thyself are fundamentally the same thing, as appears from the text and as I maintain. But one may be deceived about it; and that is what .happened to the authors of the following inscriptions: Nothing too much and To stand surety for someone invites misfortune. Regarding Know thyself as advice and. not as a salutation of the god, they wished to contribute their share of good advice and so they made those dedicatory inscriptions” (165a). AssociationValue: 0.48225628571006607


